# Extracted from PDF
# Source: https://repository.yu.edu/items/f04a17f7-cc80-422c-8f75-cd5132521785
# Pages: 1-154, DPI: 200, PSM: 6, language: heb+eng
# Generated 2026-05-01 08:40:41
# WARNING: OCR-quality. Verify against the printed page for any citation.

==== PDF page 0001 ====
RAV SAADIA GAON'S TAFSIR ON THE ARAMAIC PORTION OF DANIEL
EDITED FROM MANUSCRIPTS
AND CAIRO GENIZA FRAGMENTS
WITH AN INTRODUCTION
BY
STANLEY KLEIN
7 A MASTER'S PROJECT SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE
BERNARD REVEL GRADUATE SCHOOL
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS
OF THE DEGREE OF
MASTER OF ARTS
AS OF JANUARY, 1977
SPONSOR: /
/ |. te fo

==== PDF page 0002 ====
ABSTRACT
RAV SAADIA GAON'S TAFSIR ON THE ARAMAIC PORTION OF DANIEL
EDITED FROM MANUSCRIPTS AND CAIRO GENIZA FRAGMENTS
WITH AN INTRODUCTION
‏צ‎
‎Stanley Klein

A hurmdred and fifty years age, few ef Rav Saadia Gaen's
Arabic translations and cemzentaries en the Bible were
available te Eurepeam schelars. The rediscevery ef these
lest werks ef R. Saadia begam with the first traces ef new
1062686 im Judee-Arabic literature im seventeenth century
Eurepe, culminating im the centralizatien ef such manuscript
material im Eurepean libraries during the nimeteerth century,
when mest catalegues ef these cellectiens started te appear.
At the same time, Eurepean Jewry wae renewing its centact
with the Arabie speaking cemnunities ef Nerth Africa and
Yemen. By the end ef the mineteenth century, manuscripts
frem Yemen and the Caire Geniza previded schelars fer the
first time with the majer pertien ef R. Saadia's literary
eutput en the Bible.

Ameng these werks, 2, Saadia's Tafsir (Apabic translatien)
on the Aramaic pertion of Damiel is simgled out for treatment
here. This part ef R. Saadia's exegetical werk is feund te be
ef special significance since he was acquainted with numereus
Aramaic dialects frem written seurces, and ceuld speak a
number ef these dialects himself.Such extensive knewledge ef
598106 frem literary and oral sources was ast available Le
iater vewish schelars , and when cembined with R. Saadia's
methed ef using cemparative Semitic philolezy, yielded resuits
which are ef lasting value te medern schelarship. .\

Im 02062 te ‏ע200028%61‎ aseertain 2. 588818'8 cextribution
te the understanding ef Biblical Aramaic, we must have
receurse te manuscripts ef his Tafsir en Daniel. Am editien ef
this beek based en ene Yemenite manuscript was published by H.
Spiegel in 1906 as his decteral dissertatien, but it centains
many mistakes and emissiens , and can therefere not be relied
upen. Te reetify this situation, I have previded variants te
his text frem three ether manuscripts and four Geniza fragments.
The impertance ef these manuscripts and fraguents is that they
emable us te view the vwarieus stages ef the textual histery ef
this werk frem a shert peried after R. Saadia'’s death up te
medernm times.

==== PDF page 0003 ====
Wilo tuis infermatiem in 3220, 2. Saadia's tafsir en Daniel
is dealt with 15 the centext ef the textual criticism ef his
translatiens ef ether parts ef the Bible. Deubts have beem expressed
abeut the accuracy, reliability, amd ‏ת6צ6‎ authership ef the
text ef these translatiens as we new have them. The reasens fer
these deubts are discussed, and em the basis ef this analysis,
the reliability ef the text ef the Tafsir en Daniel 18 4.

0061001572 the intreductier, a sampling ef R. Saadia's
exegesis ef Daniel is gives which highlights the value ef the
Tafsir fer the study e Biblical Aramaic, and the inpertance ef
am accurate text ef this werk.The Judee-Arabic text ef the 2
en the Aramaic pertien ef Daniel ‏6ב+‎ 8.

==== PDF page 0004 ====
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART
I. INTRODUCTION
I. The Rediscovery of R. Saadia's Lost Works 3-7
II. R. Saadia's Knowledge of Aramaic 8-15
III. Manuscripts Used For This Edition 16-21
IV. The Text of R. Saadia's Tafsir 22-39
V. R. Saadia's Exegesis of Daniel 40-47
VI. Notes 48-58
II. BIBLIOGRAPHY 59-69
III. RAV SAADIA'S TAFSIR ON THE ARAMAIC PORTION OF DANIEL -
THE JUDEO-ARABICTEXT WITH VARIANTS 2-81

==== PDF page 0005 ====
CHAPTER I
THE REDISCOVERY OF R. SAADIA'S LOST WORKS

In the early epoch of modern Jewish scholarship, even
a scholar of the stature of 5. Rappaport had only a limited
knowledge of R. Saadia's literary output, consisting of brief \
quotations and allusions culled from medieval sources. As \
to the magnitude of his work in the field of Biblical exegesis,
Bahya Ibn Pakuda and Abraham Ibn Ezra provided some details!
The great Judeo-Arabic works written by R. Saadia and those
who followed were lost to Europeans who, with the exception
of a few scholars, understood no Arabic. Only those works
which had been translated into Hebrew had survived and con-
tinued to be used. Even in the Orient where Arabic was still
spoken, many of these works had gone out of use. The concise
and to the point Bible comments of Abraham Ibn Ezra and
Tanhum Yerushalmi had long replaced all the works of their
predecessors, but here and there some of R. Saadia's Arabic
translations and commentaries continued to be used and were
available in manuscript form. 2

The first traces of a new interest among Europeans in
Judeo-Arabic literature began in the seventeenth century with
scholars such as Joseph Scaliger; and Edward Pococke. 3
Exceptionally important in bringing such works to Europe was

3

==== PDF page 0006 ====
4
Richard Huntington. While stationed in Damascus as an English
trade attache for many years during the seventeenth century,
he managed to accumulate a collection of the Judeo-Arabic
originals of many important Jewish works, which had to wait
until the rise of modern Jewish scholarship to become well
known .4

The gradual ingathering of Hebrew and Judeo-Arabic
Manuscripts to the great university and national libraries
culminated in the nineteenth century with centralized collections
which now began to be catalogued and described for the first
time by Jewish scholars such as Munk, Dukes, Neubauer and
Steinschneider. > These scholars were knowledgeable in Arabic
language and literature, a prerequisite for undertaking
Judeo-Arabic studies.

At the same time European Jewry was renewing its contact
with the Arabic speaking Jewish communities. Southern Italy
now served as an important point of contact, just as it had
been hundreds of years earlier. The Jews of the important
Italian port city of Leghorn had close ties with those of the
North African city of Tunis, with constant traffic flowing
between these two cities.© The Jewish printing center in
Leghorn published numerous works by and for the use of North
African Jews, some of these written in Judeo-Arabic.? Important
manuscripts reached Italy through this channel and then
passed on to other European centers © A Tunisian Jewish
Maecenas was once responsible for the publication of an impor-

==== PDF page 0007 ====
5

tant Judeo-Arabic work in Paris. 9

The small Jewish population of Palestine during the
nineteenth century was another important center for contact
between far-flung Jewish communities. It was from there that
scholarly Jews were sent to solicit funds for the support of
the charitable and educational institutions of the "“Yishuv".
One of these itinerant collectors was the Ashkenazi Jacob Saphir
who travelled through a good part of Europe and the Orient.
We are fortunate to have his diary Even Saphir which contains
a detailed description of what he found interesting enough
to record. During his Eastern travels, because of his scholarly
background and interests, he was especially fascinated by
the cultural life of the Yemenite Jews 10

Living in a remote corner of the Arabian Feninsula, they
had nevertheless managed to keep in touch with the outside
Jewish world. All the variegated literary trends found in the
Midrashim, the works of the Babylonian Geonim, the Spanish
poets and philosophers, and the mystics of Safed, had had
their effects on the religious life of the Yemenite Jews.
Surprisingly enough, some of these books which had been lost
for centuries, were preserved to modern times only in Yemen. 1

Saphir's account of R. Saadia's works still in use in Yemen,
provided invaluable inférmation for European Scholars .12 Book
dealers found an abundant source of Hebrew and Judeo-Arabic
manuscripts in Yemen, where printed books were still considered
a rarity, and the impoverished Yemenite Jews were overjoyed
to find that these outsiders would pay relatively high prices

==== PDF page 0008 ====
6

for old manuscripts which were in poor condition, frequently
giving them in exchange newly printed books which were much
more usable.!3 In this way the late nineteenth century saw a
huge influx of Yemenite manuscripts to the libraries of
England and Germany, many of them Bible manuscripts containing
R. Saadia's Arabic translation. 14

But the most important and most striking event for the
recovery of R. Saadia's works was without doubt the discovery
of the Cairo Geniza. Here again Jacob Saphir played a role,
by supplying an interesting account of his brief visit there 15
Thereafter, numerous manuscript fragments began to trickle into
European libraries with some reaching S. Werthiemer in Jerusalem,
who was among the first to publish’ such materia 16 In 1896 S.
Schechter in England was fortunate enough to discover that one
such fragment contained the Hebrew original of Ben Sira, which
had been lost for over a thousand years. Electrified by this
discovery, and with the financial support mustered by Charles
Taylor, an English mathematician well versed in Rabbinics,
Schechter undertook a trip to Egypt to transfer the contents
of the Cairo Geniza to England, where it could become
available to scholars. Schechter was extremely successful in
his undertaking because of the cooperation of the Jewish com-
munity in Cairo, and so he was able to bring veritably
hundreds of thousands of manuscript pages from the Geniza of
the Ezra Synagogue and the nearby Basutin cemetery.) ’Some

==== PDF page 0009 ====
7

of these fragments are works of 2. 5880618 or letters and
documents which shed a new light on -his period.) 8 schechter
himself published a volume of such fragments, entitled appro-
Piately enough, Saadyana, and scholars have continued his work
to this day.19

Here for the first time were found parts of R. Saadia's
books which had been known only by name 20 Many of these
manuscripts date within a hundred years of R. Saadia's death,
and so represent more correct versions of some of his works
already known to us from Yemenite manuscripts~ The long
task of piecing together 2. Saadia's works has only begun; the
future will certainly bring new discoveries of some of his
still missing works.

==== PDF page 0010 ====
CHAPTER II
R, SAADIA'S KNOWLEDGE OF ARAMAIC

With the bringing of many Yemenite manuscripts to Europe
and the new Genizah findings, scholars were for the first time
able to view many of R. Saadia's Arabic translations and
commentaries to the Bible which had previously been considered
lost. At the end of the nineteenth century the time was
ripe for a complete edition of R. Saadia's works, and this
task was undertaken by J. Derenbourg with the aid of a group
of scholars. The proposed edition was to have been published
in twelve volumes in honor of the one thousandth anniversary
of R. Saadia's birth, but only six ever appeared. The seventh
volume was to have contained "Daniel, version arabe et
commentaire, avec traduction frangaise".} Not until 1906 was
‏.ם‎ Saadia's translation of Daniel published, unfortunately
only on the basis of one sixteenth century Yemenite manuscript,
even though other and earlier manuscripts were available.”
The result was a text with numerous mistakes and omissions,
which could not be relied upon without comparing other manus-
cripts. My thesis is meant to rectify this situation by
providing variants to the previously published text from
various manuscripts, in this way affording scholars the oppor-
tunity of examining R. Saadia's work on the Aramaic portion
of Daniel with a greater measure of certainty.

Does 5. Saadia's translation have any value for us today?

\ 8

==== PDF page 0011 ====
9

R. Saadia's total exegetical output on the Bible has had a
tremendous impact on later Biblical exegesis and lexicography.
One need only mention such grammarians as Jonah Ibn Ganah and
Bible commentators such as Judah Ibn Balaam who used R. Saadia
as the point of departure for their work, generally without
even mentioning his name, for his translation was the
standard one which everyone in Arabic-speaking countries was
aware of .? Through the works of Abraham Ibn Ezra and David Kimhi,
many of R. Saadia's explanations of difficult points in the
Bible were preserved and incorporated already in the early works
of modern critical scholarship.“ It is no small testimony to
Lhe lasting value of R. Saadia's work, that some of his views

\ have been substantiated only with the aid of new information
from ancient Semitic languages >

How did R. Saadia acquire this highly respected knowledge

of Hebrew, a knowledge so deep that he could use the most /
‏6תטססס‎ Biblical words in a meaningful way in his poetry,
something he in fact went of his way to do® His thorough
acquaintance with the Bible alone would not help him in this
task. R. Saadia himself says that the Bible was not meant to
be a textbook of the Hebrew language. Its purpose was theolo-
gical rather than philological, and for this reason it only
presented a partial picture of the Hebrew used in Biblical
times.’

==== PDF page 0012 ====
10
Only a language for which a large amount of written
material of all types has been preserved or that still conti-
nues to be known through a spoken, living tradition, can be
understood adequately. Biblical Hebrew is not one of these
languages, and even Mishnaic Hebrew, its later form, ceased
to be spoken hundreds of years before R. Saadia, and left
a literature of a narrowly defined nature. 8
Words which occurred infrequently in the Bible, or had
many different meanings and nuances, could not always be
understood accurately on the basis: of context alone. R.
Saadia's innovative contribution to Biblical scholarship was
> his use of cognate Semitic languages and dialects for compa-
rative purposes. His wide knowledge of Mishnaic Hebrew,
Arabic and Aramaic, controlled by his sensitivity to what the
Biblical context could bear, resulted in the elucidation of
many obscure words. It is interesting that, not long after
‏.םת‎ Saadia's death, Jonah Ibn Ganah should mention that this
. method was frowned upon by some on religious grounds. But R..
Saadia, even though he was the greatest religious authority
of his time, did not let such considerations blind him to the
_ obvious scientific truth he saw in these comparisons.”
Biblical Aramaic, however, was part of a large complex
of dialects, many of which were still spoken when R. Saadia
lived. How well was he acquainted with them? Which languages

==== PDF page 0013 ====
11
did he know?

R. Saadia was raised and educated in Egypt where Arabic
had been spoken for over two hundred years, so we may assume
that his mother tongue was Arabic? He must have been \
thoroughly acquainted with Arabic as a literary language,
since we know that he carried on a lively philosophical and
scientific correspondence with Isaac Israeli of Kairouan, and
only Arabic had the terminology necessary for these topies t!
At an early age R. Saadia already came in contact with the
Aramaic of Targum Onkelos on the Torah which was a basic
part of elementary Jewish education.” Evidence is also available
of R. Saadia's acquaintance with Targum Jonathan to the
Prophets, Targum Yerushaimi to the Torah and other Targunim,)3
From the fact that he wrote an Arabic translation 05 83%
Antiochus which he considered authentic, we see that he had
closely studied this Aramaic text which recently has been
dated as early as the second century c.g. His thorough
knowledge of the Babylonian and Jerusalem Talmudim and many
Midrashim completed his knowledge of Aramaic from written
sources, aside from the Aramaic of the Bible.!>

R. Saadia may have come in contact with Aramaic speaking
Jews in Egypt since we know that communities of Palestinian
and Babylonian Jews existed there onis most thorough contact
with spoken Aramaic dialects, however, took place during his
extended travels and sojournings in Palestine, Syria and
Babylonia.!!

==== PDF page 0014 ====
12
R. Saadia's six year long stay in Palestine was an
important milestone in his education. It was here that he
completed his linguistic and grammatical education at the
great center of the Massoretic tradition, the city of Tiberias,
under Abu Kathir Ibn Zakariya. New information recently
published by Allony has revealed the great importance of this
scholar. We now know that he himself was a practitioner of
the comparative philological method that R. Saadia was so adept
| at using. Abu Kathir devoted a whole chapter in his mostly
lost work, Principles of the Hebrew Language, to the study of
the close relationship of Aramaic and its dialects to Hebrew.
Most important were his methods of linguistic research
of oral traditions, for just as a modern scholar goes to
remote areas to record the speech of a dialect of interest to
him,2so would Abu Kathir search out Jewish speakers of Aramaic,
which was then on the wane in Palestine, in order to find
information to solve his linguistic problems 28 we should
note that this procedure was also common among medieval Arab
linguistic scholars who searched for rare words and accurate
grammatical constructions among the illiterate Bedsulim of the
Arabian desert who were thought to have preserved the pristine
beauty and purity of the Arabic language. Also R. Saadia used
this method for we find him quoting the common, every-day
Palestinian Aramaic speech of a woman asking her son's teacher
to release him from school; from here R. Saadia derived a

==== PDF page 0015 ====
13
rule of punctuation, which his teacher Abu Kathir had been «
aware of too 2?

Aramaic continued to be spoken in Babylonia into the
eleventh century, and there is no doubt that R. Saadia was
acquainted with this type of Aramaic alsoz! So well was he
attuned to the dialectical differences between Palestinian

\ and Babylonian Aramaic speech that he could even relate how
various objects are called by different names in these
dialects. There is little doubt that R. Saadia himself
actually spoke Babylonian Aramaic, especially in the environs
of the Yeshiva of sura 2? In this vein an anecdote preserved
for us by Moses Ibn Ezra may be of some interest. He quotes
a biographer of ₪. Hai's who tells the following story: >
“What happened was that this Gaon, (R. Hai), found a word of
the Fayyumite of blessed memory, (R. Saadia), in one of his

\ *bakashot' and did not know its meaning or his intent. So
he concentrated on it, fell asleep and saw him (that is R.
Saadia) in his sleep, and asked him about it in the Aramaic
language they were fluent in." ?Whatever one may think of
this story, its author, R. Masliah, had been a student of |
‏.קת‎ 181'5 and certainly was well aware of the linguistic
situation in tenth and eleventh century Babylonia 2

==== PDF page 0016 ====
14
Not only was R. Saadia knowledgeable in the area of Aramaic,

but it also played a special role for him. R. Saadia in his
Agron conceived his task to be that of setting an example for
and teaching the correct usage of Hebrew to budding young
poets. His interest in creating an elegant but clear classical
Hebrew style was no doubt a reaction against the Arab claim

of superiority over all other languages. He wanted to prepare
for the use of poets a Hebrew vocabulary cleansed ef all
foreign elements such as Persian or Greek words. Aramaic,
however, was considered differently because of its closeness

to Hebrew..and the fact that it was included in the Bible and
used so much in the liturgy. Even though R. Saadia in his
Sefer ha-Galui bemoans the fact that Aramaic (together with
Arabic) has replaced Hebrew as the spoken language, he is willing
to incorporate many Aramaic words into the Hebrew language by
changing their form slightly to fit more closely into Hebrew.
R. Saadia in his Hebrew poetry used Aramaic words which he had
Hebraised and no doubt under his influence, the harbinger of
the Golden Age of Poetry in Spain, Dunash Ibn Labrat, did the
same. To R. Saadia, then, Biblical Aramaic shared to some
extent in the holiness and importance of the Hebrew language
and so was worthy of the same exacting study that the Hebrew
| part of the Bible received.

R. Saadia's Tafsir on the Aramaic portion of Daniel 8

special value for us today because he alone among medieval

==== PDF page 0017 ====
15
scholars had the most extensive information from both written
and oral sources at hand to explain Biblical Aramaic, and
felt the need to understand it thoroughly enough to be able
to use it in poetry. Therefore, for the study of Biblical
Aramaic and the Aramaic vocabulary of the Spanish poets, a
renewed interest in R. Saadia's work on Daniel is in order..

==== PDF page 0018 ====
CHAPTER III |
MANUSCRIPTS USED FOR THIS EDITION
1. Ms. a.

In 1906 Hermann Spiegel published as his doctoral
dissertation Saadia al-Fajjumi's arabische Danielversion,
with a brief German introduction and some notes. 4 The only
manuscript used for this edition was the Berlin Ms. Or.
no.1203 of Steinschneider's catalogue. This manuscript has
175 pages and contains the text of the Hagiographa with
Babylonian punctuation and an interlinear Arabic translation.
Its colophon indicates that it was written in Yemen in 1597.2
Editors of R. 588018'8 Tafsir on other books of the Bible,

J. Cohn, W. Bacher, J. Derenbourg and J. Kafih, have used
this same manuscript for their own editions.?

Spiegel offers as his text a “corrected" version of the
Berlin manuscript, while the original readings are relegated
to his notes. Words oar phrases which he considered to be mis-
sing, were inserted in square brackets based on conjecture
alone. Original readings of this Ms. are referred to in my
variants asa. As I was not able to consult this Ms. because
its whereabouts after World War II are not known, I have had
to rely on the accuracy of Spiegel's transcription, which
serves here as the basic text??

16

==== PDF page 0019 ====
17
2. Ms. ‏.א‎

The Bodleian Library in Oxford has the distinction of
having the only manuscript known of R. Saadia's long commentary
on Daniel, aside from Geniza fragments. It includes his
Arabic translation along with the Biblical text, and was
among the "latest acquisitions" of the 1880's; its catalogue
number is 2486. Neubauer describes this Ms. as being “very
fragmentary and much injured" for none of the chapters are
complete. It is written in Syrian square characters in quarto
size, on paper, and has 175 pages. “ of the six chapters covered
by my edition, this manuscript contains: Dan 2:29-4:9; 4:15-
7:12:

3. Ms. p,

A Yemenite manuscript of the book of Daniel with R.
Saadia's Tafsir, belonging to Rabbi Joseph Kafih was published
in facsimile in 1973 by Shelomo Morag. It is probably to be
ascribed to the thirteenth or fourteenth century, and is only
fragmentary, with the missing portions being supplied by a
later hand. This Ms. covers the following parts of my editin:
Dan. 2:11-29; 2:38-3:26; 4:17-32; 5:6-6:8; 7:3-28.>

Morag's interest in publishing the Ms. was limited to
the nature of the Biblical Aramaic portrayed therein, with no
attention at all payed to the text of 2. Saadia's Tafsir.

==== PDF page 0020 ====
18
4. Ms. 1p,

The missing pages of Ms. ‏ק‎ were filled in over seventy
years ago by R. Shalom ben R. Yahya Kafih. While the older
manuscript had the Biblical text written with Babylonian
vocalisation, this newer one was copied from a Ms. with
Tiberian vocalisation. This Ms., included in Morag's fac-
simile edition for the sake of completeness, covers: Dan. 2:1-
10; 2:30-37; 3:27-4:16; 4:33-5:5; 6:9-7:2.° ‘
5. Ms. ‏,ת‎ /

In 1971 a facsimile of this manuscript containing the
entire book of Daniel with Saadia's Tafsir, was published in
Israel. The anonymous publisher calls it an “ancient manuscript
from Yemen", While one can be suré that it is written in a
Yemenite hand, it is most certainly not ancient. For one
thing, the beginning verse of each chapter of the Biblical
text (given here with Tiberian vocalisation) is indented, and \
the chapter number included in the body of the text. This
practice came about under the influence of printed bibles which
first began to circulate in Yemen in large numbers in the nine-
teenth century, and does not occur even in the relatively
modern Ms. 1D, Secondly, on the basis of the handwriting
alone, it seems to be no older than one of the manuscripts
shown in 5. Birnbaum*s important work on Hebrew paleography.

==== PDF page 0021 ====
19
That "Temanic Square” handwriting is dated 1747 and already |
was influenced by the Sephardic printing type.7
6. Ms. 9,

The Saltykov-Schedrin Public Library in Leningrad houses
the Antonin collection of Geniza manuscripts. This six page
fragment found there is mentioned in A. I. Katsh's handlist
as number 476 and is described as "Saadia Gaon on Daniel in
Arabic" .® It is written on parchment, with 31 to 33 lines per
page.

As far as the date of this fragment is concerned, we are
in a position to ascribe it to the first half of the eleventh
century. On the recto of page 1 the Ms. reads: ‏"ליוסף בן‎
‏ישוטה ש'צ' יחיה ויזכה"‎ Interestingly enough, this figure
shows up in a number of Geniza sources, and is a signatory
on a document written in Fostat in 1041 C.E., here with the
title of “ha-Parnas".? While there may, of course, have been
two people with the same name, the pool of names occurring in
the Geniza is somewhat limited and in addition, the handwriting
of the Ms. does support such an early date. This Ms. contains
part of R. Saadia's long commentary and his Arabic translation
of Dan. 2, verses: 1-2, 8-19, 22-29, 32, 35-45.

Some scribal features of interest are that no diacritical
points occur except on the letter 2 and that words are broken
off in the middle at the endwfa line, and then are continued

==== PDF page 0022 ====
20
on the next one.
7. Ms. ‘a,

A two page fragment of R. Saadia's Tafsir alone is found
in the small Geniza collection of Westminster College in
Cambridge, England, under the number Arabic volume 1, fragment
no. 132. It has 17 to 19 lines per page and is written on
paper. The fragment does not have diacritical points except
above the $ and at times ‏אל-‎ is written separately. It
covers Dan. 3:29-4:10; 4:32»5:9.

8. Ms. By.

The transference of the contents of the Cairo Geniza
to libraries of many different countries is responsible for
the fact that parts of the same manuscript frequently have
become separated only to be reconstructed by painstakingly dif-
ficult scholarly 1801 ,10 such has been the case with these
three fragments which are part of one manuscript of R. Saadia's
commentary and Arabic translation. The first fragment of two
pages was shown to me by Dr. M. Zucker. It includes the
Tafsir to Dan. 3:24-30. The second fragment, also of two
pages is numbered T-S, Fragments box Misc. 28, Frag. no. 222,
and covers the Tafsir to Dan. 6:5-29; 7:23-28. A third fragment
of this manuscript which contains one page of the Arabic com  -
mentary is found in Westminster College, Arabic vol. 2 frag. 178.

==== PDF page 0023 ====
21

The two last fragments were found by Dr. . Hurvitz. The ma-
nuscript is written in an eleventh century cursive hand and
contains from 30 to 34 lines per page. -!
9. Ms. 34,

A one page fragment, T-S Arabic box 51 frag. 3, contains

> part of R. Saadia's commentary and his Tafsir ‏מס‎ Dan. 7:15-18.

It has 18 lines per page and is written in large square Baby-
lonian characters of the eleventh century. Diacritical points
are found above the letters 5 and ‏בצ‎

The collation of these manuscripts has been done for the
entire book of Daniel, but only the. Tafsir on the Aramaic part
is presented here because of its unique importance for the
understanding of Biblical Aramaic. After the Judeo-Arabic
portion of this thesis was completed, a number of other Geniza
fragments have been discovered by me, but they regrettably could
not be included here. The fragments used, however, provide a
good example of the types of manuscripts available in the
Geniza and are invaluable in serving as a control to the evidence.
presented by the Yemenite manuscripts.

==== PDF page 0024 ====
CHAPTER IV
THE TEXT OF R. SAADIA'S TAFSIR

In dealing with the Tafsir on Daniel we may ask if what
we find in the manuscripts is really 2. Saadia's own work.

On the surface, we are able to answer this question
positively by pointing to the many parallels with R. Saadia's
other works, and references to it by later authors which agree
with the text of the Tafsir as we have it. Moreover, R. Saadia's
long commentary on Daniel, where he refers to his well known
Beliefs and Opinions, contains allusions to his translation
which are found in our text.) We may be sure then, that the
Tafsir on Daniel that we have is R. Saadia's, but,,is it in
the same form as it was when it left the author's hands?

The Tafsir on Daniel is only a small part of R. Saadia's
Arabic translation of many parts of the Bible, and the textual
reliability and even authenticity of other parts of this
translation has been called into question by scholars. We shall
discuss these doubts, analyze the reasons behind them, and
then return to consider the state of the text of the Tafsir
on Daniel in the light of our findings.

The history of the development of the text of R. Saadia's

\ 21016 translation spans the long period from the tenth to the
twentieth century, from the time it was composed until the
22

==== PDF page 0025 ====
| 23
Yemenite Jews, the last Jewish community preserving a manuscript
tradition of the Tafsir, ceased to exist as an isolated entity
in 1948.

Soon after R. Saadia's time, quite a number of new trans-
lations became available for various parts of the Bible. Fre-
quently, one who wrote a commentary on a particular part of
the Bible included a new translation. We know of a number of
such translations which have survived, while many have been
lost? The nature of these translations and their proximity
or distance from R. Saadia's vary widely. Some, such as
parts of R. Samuel ben Hophni's translation of the Pentateuch
are actually revised versions of R. Saadia's Tafsir. Only
occasional changes necessitated by 8 different understanding
of the original were made.° Others, such as the translations
of Yefet ben Ali the Karaite, are meant to be totally indepen-
dent of R. Saadia's work and therefore diverge entirely
from his wording, sometimes just for the sake of offering a
non-Saadianic translation, but even in this case, occasional
similarities are unavoidable.’

In the thirteenth century the Samaritan community found
it necessary to have an Arabic translation of the Pentateuch
for its own use, so R. Saadia's Tafsir was revised to corres-
pond to the different Hebrew text of the Samaritans, and some
other changes of a theological nature were made. >

==== PDF page 0026 ====
24

The opportunities for these secondary translations to
infiltrate and affect in return the original Tafsir of R. Saadia
are myriad, for in the hands of scribes and copyists anything
can happen. At worst, another's translation can be ascribed
to R. Saadia if the manuscript does not state clearly who
the translator is. A defective manuscript of R. Saadia's
Tafsir to some book can have the missing parts filled in from
another author's translation. A scribe having a number of :
translations before him, may create a hybrid version by
selecting for each word or phrase the translation he prefers.

With passing generations, subtle changes sometimes occur.
Without thinking, copyists may substitute grammatical forms
and spellings current in their own time for the antiquated
ones found in older manuscripts. Certain words in the Tafsir
of R. Saadia were not in common use even in his own time, and
may have been exchanged for more current ones at a later date ©

The liturgical and pedagogical use of Arabic translations
of the Bible is also an important factor in the history of
the text of R. Saadia's Tafsir. R. Saadia's almost classical
Arabic would generally be beyond the understanding of the
young or uneducated, those who needed a translation most, and
especially by the late middle ages, the distance between the
spoken Arabic dialects and R. Saadia's exhalted Arabic had

==== PDF page 0027 ====
25
grown immensly./ The Tafsir on the parts of the Bible read
publicly most often, the Pentateuch and Five Scrolls, were most
open to simplification and wholesale revision.
Thus we see that numerous possibilities for the text of
R. Saadia's translation to gradually change its original form
existed. Do we have any actual evidence, though, that this
has happened? Here scholars offer us a wide spectrum of opinions.
Paul Kahle, the famous Bible scholar, goes so far as to
state that he considers the standard version of the Tafsir
on the Pentateuch "8 textus receptus, written for the convenience
of the Arabic speaking Jews in Yemen and based on the translation
of Satadya" 5 His student, Max Katten, suggests that our text |
results from the fixing of a standard text of ‘an Arabic trans-
lation to the Pentateuch based on R. Saadia's, in eleventh
century Babylonia?
The main reason for these contentions is that certain
\ differences exist between this standard text and quotations
from medieval sources, which seem to indicate that we no Longer
possess the original version of the Tafsir. These differences
were examined by Dr. M. Zucker but were found to be of much
less significance than Katten had thought. While a few of
the quotations differing from the text of the Tafsir may
actually be from various other commentaries by R. Saadia, or
different editions of his works, many others are the result
of mistakes or changes typical to all manusctipts but not sig-
nificant enough to consider the Tafsir non-Saadianic.!0

==== PDF page 0028 ====
26

The extreme opposite of Kahle's view is that ₪ Joseph
Kafih. He is of the opinion that the Yemenite text of the
Tafsir as represented by the oldest manuscripts of this type,
are quite accurate, while the many variants found are indica-
tive of the continuing revisions of R. Saadia'to his translation!
All, then, acknowledge the existence of variants, but differ
only as to their significance.

S. Abramson, in discussing a particular instance of
variants, mentions that it is difficult to determine which
reading in the Tafsir is correct, since ‏.א‎ Saadia translated
the Pentateuch twice and each variant may stem from a different
translationl2 This notion lends new authority to the many
variants which are found, and could serve as an all-encompassing
explanation for how they came into being. Abramson is’not alone
in this matter; in fact, this is the standard opinion voiced
by scholars such as Derenbourg, Steinschneider, Eppenstein,
and Maiter!?

The source for this view is the introduction by R. Saadia
himself, which occurs before the Tafsir on the Torah in
Derenbourg's edition!* After a discussion of a theological =
nature, R. Saadia says that he was requested to write a book
which would deal exclusively with the simple meaning of the
Torah without the long involved philological and theological
explanations which are so characteristic of his long commentary.
This new work is taken by the above-mentioned scholars to be
the Tafsir which we now have.

There are certain problems though, inherent in accepting

==== PDF page 0029 ====
27

this view, if we carry it through to its final conclusion.
What we are actually saying is that R. Saadia translated the
Torah into Arabic, wrote a commentary on large parts of it,
and then translated the Torah again. The nature of the first
translation must have been such that it could not exist inde-
pendently, but only made sense when the long commentary was
at hand to explain all its obscurities and peculiarities.
Only by considering the first translation to have been of this
nature, can we explain the need for a second translation which
could make clear sense without any recourse to a commentary.

Now, it should be pointed out that, as far as I can tell,
the Tafsir on the Torah as we have it differs in no way whatso-
ever in style, method or clarity, from R. Saadia's translations
to other books of the Bible for which, in addition, we have
his long commentaries. Are we to assume that these long
commentaries were also written to elucidate previous transla-
tions of R. Saadia's, now lost, which could not be understood
independently? The existence of such translations would be
very helpful in accounting for the numerous variants found in
the manuscripts of R. Saadia's Tafsir to these books. But
this assumption cannot be accepted, for we clearly see the
close connection with and many allusions to the Arabic trans-
lations we now have, in every part of these commentaries.
Similarly, the fragments of R. Saadia's long commentary on the
Torah which have survived, refer to a text of R. Saadia's
translation which is essentially the same as

==== PDF page 0030 ====
8

ours, and even when a significant departure from our text
occurs, it is not one which would indicate the existence of
a previous translation different in clarity and simplicity
from the present one! The differences which occur are no
more radical than those found in the textual history of any
medieval text of so popular a nature, and certainly are not
grave enough to force us to conclude that a previous Tafsir
on the Torah had been written and lost.

If we nevertheless feel constrained to believe that R.
Saadia did translate the Torah twice becouse he apparently
says so in his introduction to the Tafsir, we would do well
to examine this introduction carefully. There are four parts
of it which are crucial in ascertaining the nature of the
work being discussed !é :

The first iswhere R, 588018 says he wrote his book in
answer to a request, "T7950 ‏"אן אנפרד בסיםס נץ אלתורה פי כתאב‎
“to devote a special work to the simple meaning of the text
of the Torah". This could mean a translation, but could
just as well be a brief commentary. More telling is where
R. Saadia says that instead of long involved explanations he
would give ‏."אכראג מעאני נץ אלתורה פקם"‎ Both Derenbourg and
Kafih take the word ‏אכראג‎ to have the meaning of translating,
and would say that R. Saadia was stating that he would trans-
late the meaning of the text of the Torah alone! ? While the

==== PDF page 0031 ====
29

Arabic root 173 has meanings which include elucidating and
presenting to the public, we must acknowledge that R. Saadia
himself uses it in reference to his Arabic translation! On
the other hand, since he also uses it with the meaning of
explaining, we do not have to assume that a translation is
being referred to here. !9

Towards the end of this introduction, R. Saadia describes
his work aS "ops ‏בסים נץ אלתורה‎ Wosn". The word ‏תפסיך‎ is
translated by Derenbourg | ‏תה "פתרון"‎ ambiguous word which
means “explanation”, while Kafih gives the meaning ‏"תרגום"‎
‎which clearly means "translation". 20106 again, while R. Saadia
often uses this word when referring to his translation, it can
just as well mean explanation, interpretation or commentary. 2!

At the end of his introduction, 8. Saadia says that where
he is able to add a word or letter which would reveal the
meaning without any further comment, he would do so. Since
this is a typical aspect of his translation we may feel that
this is what is referred to here? But what if the mere addition
of a word or letter would not suffice to make the meaning of
a verse clear, doesn':t this imply that here some sort of
remark or comment would be in order? While this would suite
a short commentary, it would be totally out of place ina
translation. R. 588018 may simply be stressing his desire
to be as brief as possible here, in contradistinction to his
long commentary.

==== PDF page 0032 ====
20
We may conclude on the basis of this analysis that ‏.א‎
‎Saadia's introduction cannot conclusively be proven to have
| been meant for a second translation, but could just as well
have been an introduction to a short commentary. Are we,
however, substituting one unprovable theory for another?
\ Here we are on firmer ground for we have some relevant evidence
from the Geniza and other sources.

In the list of R. Saadia's works compiled after his death
by his sons, an almost complete account of his works on the
Bible is given. The works on the Torah mentioned are: 1.- R.
Saadia's translation, 2.- his long commentary on the first
half of Genesis and on Exodus and Leviticus, 3.- ‏כתאב אזהאר‎
‏תס אלךדאץ‎ the entire Torah, 4.- questions on the Torah?? We
hardly know anything about the ‏יכתאב אזהאך אלריאץ‎ while the
other three works are obviously not, short commentaries on the
Toran2* Mann translated the title as Choice of Practices and
felt that it probably dealt with the laws of the Pentateuch
in their Biblical order, on which (2. Saadia offered his
comments?> But aside from the fact that the title is more
properly translated Garden Flowers, the non-Halachic nature
of some of the quotations we have from this book show that
Mann was wronge?® 5. Pognanski considers this work to have
contained short glosses to the Pentateuch, (which we shall call
the "short commentary") and equates it with the work referred
to in R. Saadia's above-mentioned introduction. In addition,
Poznanski assumes that D7029R ‏,אלפרת‎ the plain commentary
of R. Saadia quoted by R. Abraham Maimonides refers also to

==== PDF page 0033 ====
31
these short glosses. 7 \

Since R. Abraham in his Arabic commentary on Genesis and
Exodus quotes R. Saadia by name quite frequently, I examined
these quotations carefully in order to determine whether any
clear evidence for the existence of a short commentary by R.
Saadia could be founa 28 Most of these quotes did not furnish
evidence conclusive enough to decide this issue, except for
R. Abraham's comment on Gen. 49:4 where he says: ‏"ור סעדיה זכ‎

JIS ‏ולם תתחלל אלא אנת ואמא‎ WITT ‏יקול מא מפנאה אנת חללת‎
‏פמנזה ען אלחלול,"‎ nar
Here we have an explanation by R. Saadia which is obviously
not from his translation, and also not from from his long
\ commentary which ended with Gen. 28:9. te could only be from
his short commentary, and, as should be noted, is in the form
of an extremely Loose paraphrase.

Two other quotations in R. Saadia's name occur, which are
of interest to us. The first one, mentioned by Dunash Ibn Labrat
in his critique of R. Saadia reads: ‏רעוד פירש גנובתי יום‎

‎(Gen. 31;39)‏ | פמלתי מן לשון עמל וריגיעה והביא ראיה מן גנבתו סופה,
‎(Job 21:18) ,0‏
‎This comment also, because of its location and nature, could‏
‎only be from the short commentary 3! Most instructive, however,‏
‎is a reference from R. Nissim Gaon's Meggilat Setarim, for here‏
"ואמא ‎clearly occurs 2 R. Nissim says:‏ כתאב אלאזהא, ‎the name‏
קול רבי' סעדיה ‎ORI‏ אלמתיבה זק"ל פי כתאב אלאזהאר בפרשת רישב
יעקב, יקום יקולון אלה תולדות יפקב יוסף כ'צה לאנה כאן ‎ATID‏
‏שקול כנגד כל בניו כקו' הנאך והיה בית יפעקב אש ובית ווסף להבה
וכו' וקאל הנאך גאלת בזרוע ‎YoU‏ בני יעקב ויוסף סלה ויגעלון להם
:

==== PDF page 0034 ====
32
תשביהא פי ת'לאת'ה ועשרין מעני ליס הני ‎vein‏ שרתהא?"

R. 588018 mentions that Joseph was similar to Jacob in

twenty three ways but says that this is not the place to

spell them out; R. Nissim however was asked to explain them,

which he proceeds to do in a page-long exposition. This has

to be a reference to the short commentary because it, again,

is from the part of Genesis on which R. Saadia did not write

his long commentary and is certainly not from his translation.

Even one who claims that R. Saadia's long commentary covered

all of Genesis, would have to admit that this quotation is

not from that work,for, otherwise, why would R. Saadia hesitate

to list the twenty-three similarities the way R. Nissim dia? 22
\ 2. 588018'8 interest in brevity here, however, is in full

accordance with His intentions in his brief commentary, as

expressed by him in his introduction.

We see then that R. Saadia did write a short commentary
on the Torah, which would fit the description given in the
introduction printed by Derenbourg, and also correspond with
our knowledge of the works . 2. Saadia composed on the Penta-
teuch. There is no reason, therefore, to believe that two
translations to the Torah were ever written by him, an idea

==== PDF page 0035 ====
33
which,,as we demonstrated, makes no sense on logical grounds \
alone. The notion that every variant to the Tafsir on the Torah
which makes sense is automatically to be imbued with Saadianic
authority, should be dispensed with, and unless unassailable
proof of Saadianic origin is provided, such variants must be
understood to have developed in that same gradual manner typical
of variants to all medieval texts.

The reliability of the text of R. Saadia's Arabic trans-
lations to other books of the Bible has also been questioned.
Bacher, in his edition of ‏,א‎ Saadia's Tafsir on Job says that,
“One should not be surprised that there are so many variants
to this translation for many people tampered with it, and
copyists were not afraid to change words and grammatical forms.”.
He mentions the possibility that some variants are the result
of R. Saadia changing his mind in the second edition of his
commentary ‘on Job, which Bacher claims existed, based on his
finding a long and short version of parts of this commentary 24
Ratzaby was the first to point out that the Yemenite manuscripts
contain a version of the commentary quite different from the
one published by Bacher. While this new version contains
comments which other medieval writers quote in R. Saadia's
name, certain parts have been tampered with, as is evirieed by
the muddled tone and faulty Arabic style of some sections,
quite untypical of R. Saadia's writing. Nevertheless, Ratzaby

==== PDF page 0036 ====
34
walks a thin tightrope by saying that even such parts should
be considered Saadianiciin spirit and content if not in form
and language. 2°

What is important to note here is that even the long com-
mentaries of R. Saadia have not entirely been immune from
significant changes at the Hands of later copyists. These
commentaries are usually considered to be the best criteria
for judging the accuracy of R. Saadia's translations. Texts
of the Tafsir found together with the commentaries, should be
most accurate because they were copied less often than those
with the translations alone, and scribes would not feel that
free to make changes in the Tafsir at their whim, when faced
with the original version mentioned in these commentaries. ©
Since we see, however, that the commentaries themselves may
have been tampered with, we must be more careful in evaluating
the evidence they have to offer about the text of the
translations.

Doubts about the authenticity and reliability of texts
attributed to R. Saadia are no more prevalent than in the
instance of the Tafsir to the Five Scrolls. Here total confu-
sion reigns.

Only commentaries on Lamentations and Esther, which must
have included translations, are mentioned in the list of R.
Saadia's works compiled by his sons, but Yemenite manuscripts
contain Arabic translations ascribed to R. Saadia on the other
Scrolls also2’S, Poznanski considers 2. Saadia's authorship
of the translation of Lamentations, found in these manuscripts,

==== PDF page 0037 ====
35

"still subject to investigation,” while the translation to
Esther, "perhaps slightly revised". The translation of
Canticles, according to him, exhibits “many Saadyanic charac-
teristics", that to Ruth, “has nothing to do with Saadya", and
that to Ecclesiastes, is the work of R. Isaac Ibn Giyyat2®
Matters are further complicated by the existence, according
to Kafih, of no less than five Arabic translations to Ruth

in Yemen, some attributed to R. Saadia and some simply called
"Tafsir"? This state of affairs inevitably leads to an
entanglement of versions which can only be cleared up by
checking earlier Geniza manusctipts, and is symptomatic of
the freedom Yemenite scribes allowed themselves in copying
certain works of a popular nature.

After examining different aspects of the textual problems
of various parts of R. Saadia's Tafsir, we may now see how the
text of his Tafsir on Daniel has fared in the hands of the
copyists. This new edition, based on manuscripts from within
a hundred years of R. Saadia's death up to modern times, pro-
vides us with an excellent opportunity for viewing the develop-
ment of the text from an historical perspective. Our range
of manuscripts include many different types whose value for
textual criticism varies.

==== PDF page 0038 ====
36
Geniza manuscripts from the eleventh century such as», ?,
and / may be considered to be most trustworthy because of
their early date, but Yemenite manuscripts must form the basis
for this edition because only in them do we find a continuous
text of a homogeneous nature, unless eventually a complete
manuscript from the Geniza can be pieced together. But the
early date of a Ms. does not guarantee its accuracy nor does
a later date imply less importance for textual criticism.
Ms. p aithough perhaps as late as the fourteenth century,
has a Biblical text which was copied from a Babylonian
version written before the complete takeover by the Tiberian
Massoretical tradition of Babylonia itser ft? Does this en-
hance the importance of the text of the Tafsir which accom~
panies it? We may answer in the negative for it is certain
that 2. Saadia's translation was meant by him to accompany
the text of the Tiberian tradition which he followed.
Furthermore, in the earliest Mss. ‏,ל‎ 2 and 34 the Biblical
text is never included but only the first Biblical word in
each verse proceeds each verse of translation, so that the /
presence of the whole Biblical text may not be indicative of
antiquity or accuracy.
These manuscripts which contain ‏.א‎ Saadia's commentary
\ along with his translation may be considered more accurate
because such Mss. were copied less often and were less open

==== PDF page 0039 ====
. 37

to tampering, but even on Daniel this cannot be considered
a foolproof criterion. Malter has expressed the opinion
that R. Saadia's commentary on Daniel has been tampered with 41
Does this mean that the whole commentary and translation in
Ms. ‏א‎ which Malter referred to is under suspicion? A comparison
with the other Mss. does not warrant such a conclusion, so
the tampering Malter suspects must be limited to the interpo-
lation of a féw lines to make explicit what 2. Saadia did not-
the exact date of the coming of the Messiah. Certain phrases
in Ms. ‏א‎ are translated quite differently than in the other
manuscripts 42 Has this Ms., because it is accompanied by the
commentary, preserved for us more original readings than those
-Mss. without the commentary?

In judging the accuracy of the text of the Tafsir on
Daniel we are not aided by the commentary. While quotations
of the Tafsir in the commentary never indicate the existence
of a text totally different from the one we have, they never \
substantiate with complete accuracy a reading in the Tafsir.
R. Saadia simply has an aversion to quoting himself verbatim,
and when quoting his translation usually reproduces a word
with the same Arabic root but different grammatical form.
This abhorrence of repetition is a very important factor
in understanding the reason for certain types of variants.
The many lists of government officials, musical instruments
and other matters which are repeated constantly in Daniel
always occur with variants between verses in the same manuscript

==== PDF page 0040 ====
38
although the Aramaic original is the same. 5. 2. Goitein has
pointed out that it is typical of Geniza scribes to purposely
vary the wording in repeated formulae,evidently to lessen the
monotony of the text being copiedt4 Medieval standards of
. seribal accuracy, then, do not correspond to ours and make the
goal of reaching a text identical with that which left the
author's hands, almost unattainable. \
Is there a possibility that the text of 2. Saadia's
| Tafsir on Daniel has been modernized to be more suitable for
liturgical or other public use? Many North African Jewish
communities have the custom of reading Daniel publicly before
the Sabbath Minha services for six weeks after Tisha be-Av,
in six installments .45 Evidently for such use, a fairly modern
Judeo-Arabic version of Daniel has been published in Algeria,
but I found no similarities between it and R. Saadia's Tafsir .46
As yet no manuscript of 2. Saadia's translation from this area
has come to light, so that we have no information about any
attempt to modernize his work on Daniel for public use; neither
is such a possibility indicated by the variants in my edition.
In many cases variants found in the latest manuscripts
are attested to by the earliest manuscripts.4/ Because of
insufficient information, a clear grouping of say, Yemenite
manuscripts on the one hand and early Geniza manuscripts on
the other, cannot meaningfully be made, and there is no
certainty that further Geniza finds will improve this situation.

==== PDF page 0041 ====
39

Nevertheless, some attempt at showing the relationship
between the various manuscripts can be made. If we divide
the manuscript history of the Tafsir on Daniel into three periods
subsequent to the time of its authorship, we may postulate the
existence of four different types during the first period:
‏,ל‎ 2, the ancestor of prand that of n'pa; during the
second period: ‏6ם8 ב , ק, א‎ the closely related ancestor of
nip; for the third period, the closely related 1p and ‏ת‎ have
survived.

All that can be said at the present is that we have R.
Saadia's Tafsir on Daniel substantially as he wrote it, but
we cannot delineate exactly the changes that have taken place
until more information becomes available.

==== PDF page 0042 ====
CHAPTER V
R. SAADIA'S EXEGESIS OF DANIEL - A SAMPLING

The significance of R. Saadia's Tafsir on the Aramaic
portion of Daniel can best be grasped by viewing some of his
translations to certain words in the context of modern

| scholarship. For this purpose J.A. Montgomery's A Critical

and Exegetical Commentary on the Book of Daniel published in

1927 is invaluable} since it takes into account the works of
all medieval and modern commentators and also the new informa-
tion available from the Aramaic of the Elephantine Papyri and
modern comparative Semitic philology. Seen in the light of
the interpretations offered there, it is striking to notice
how many of R. 588018'8 translations agree with modern view-
points which are based on new information, and how often R.
Saadia is the originator of explanations followed by others,
which have not become outdated or overshadowed by modern disco-
veries. The following selections, arranged in the order of
the Biblical text, offer ample evidence of these phenomena.
Dan. 2:5.  אדדא‎ 730 ‏,מלתא‎

R. 588018 translates: ‏גד 130 אלאמך‎ tp, “the matter is
in earnest with me". Ibn Ezra considers this word to be one
that can only be understood by its context and says that it
has the meaning of ‏ראמת‎ RO77p or, more exactly here, ‏ב תתקיים‎
Rashi equates ‏אדדא‎ with ‏.אזלא‎ Pseudo-Saadia mentions two
interpretations: That ‏אזדא‎ is like ‏,אזלא‎ or that it signifies

40

==== PDF page 0043 ====
1
‏תרקפח‎ 85 does ‏זדון‎ and as does, perhaps, the common Talmudic
phrase ‏.ראזדא רבא לטעמיה‎ The Elephantine Papyri corroborate
R. Saadia's view for we find there the phrase: | ‏יהן אזד יתעבד‎
“if it was made certain"?
Dan. 2:5. 7973.
\ R. 588018 translates: ‏,צואפי‎ "booty", and Yephet also
follows this interpretation. Ibn Ezra explains: ‏הרוסות וחרבה‎
‏ושממה‎ , and Rashi:  הפשא.‎ Pseudo-Saadia offers three
interpretations:  הזיב‎ , ‏(,מנורול‎ and ‏.חריבת‎ Torrey has found
the root %1}with the meaning of confiscation or booty in a
Phoenician inscription, thus supporting R. Saadia's translation?
Dan. 2:6. ‏להך‎ .
2. 588018 translates:  ךלאדל,‎ "therefore". Rashi and
Pseudo-Saadia explain: ‏אך‎ "but". This work usually does
\ mean "but" (as in Dan. 2:11, 30; 3:28; 6:6,8, 13), however,
the meaning demanded by the context here is "therefore". While
this meaning vanished later from Aramaic and was not known to
the medieval Jewish commentators, it is attested to by its \
appearance in the Teima inscription?
Dan. 2:9. ‏.די הן‎
2. 588618 translates: ‏,באנכם אןך‎ “that if". Similary,
Ibn Ezra (on verse 8) explains: ox ‏,והרא‎ and Rashi and Pseudo-
Saadia: orm. While most modern commentators feel that a new
statement begins here, R. Saadia and the other Jewish commenta-
tors correctly understood that ‏דד הן‎ serves as a connective
to continue the statement made in verse 2

==== PDF page 0044 ====
| 42
Dan. 2:12. ‏בנס‎ .

R. Saadia translates: ‏שאט‎ , “burned (with anger)". Ibn
Ezra, Rashi and Pseudo-Saadia take the ‏ב‎ to be an auxiliary
letter and not part of the basic root. Rashi quotes Menahem
who feels that the ‏ב‎ 15 part of the root, and Dunash who
feels that it is not. Allony, in his comments to the Agron,
seems to have misunderstood R. Saadia's view to be that the 2
is not part of the root as most later Jewish commentators
Claimed. Aside from the fact that, if Allony were correct,
R. Saadia would have had to translate the ‏ב‎ together with 8
noun or at least a verbal noun instead of just a verb, and
that the root ‏בסס‎ may mean “to be sad" or “grieve" but never
to be angry, the root ‏בנס‎ 18 found with the meaning “to be
angry" in Jewish and Samaritan Targumim®
Dan. 2:13.  ןילטקתמ.‎ \ \

R. 588618 translates  j19np1, "were to be killed".
Rashi and Pseudo-Saadia also explain: anni». The gerundive
interpretation given by R. Saadia is accepted by many modern
commentators!

Dan. 3:14.  תחדצה.‎

\ 2. 588018 translates: ‏ב יקיבא‎ "certainly". Ibn Ezra says
that the ‏ה‎ is the interrogative nand that ‏צדא‎ means nor.

Rashi agrees about the nature of then, but explains ‏צדא‎ as 117
‏רק‎ . Pseudo-Saadia explains: ‏בודאד‎ .  יאדצה‎ 88 been found
with a meaning similar to that given to it by R. 588018, in

an Aramaic ostracon published by Lidzbarski®

==== PDF page 0045 ====
43
,| למלכא נבוכדנצר .3:16 ‎Dan.‏

R. 588618 translates: 731952 ‏.יא‎ The difficulty here
is that Nebuchadnezzar is addressed by his name alone, which
is not the way one would normally speak to a monarch. Rashi,
giving a Midrashic interpretation, explains that this statement
was purposely meant to have a disparaging tone. Some modern
scholars have felt that the ‏אתנתתא‎ was simply misplaced, but
R. Saadia's translation: "Oh Nebuchadnezzar", shows that he
followed the traditional punctuation and interpretation here?
Dan. 3:17. yn.

R. Saadia translates: TR, ‏"עס+"‎ or “behold". Similarly,
Ibn Ezra and Rashi (on verse 16) explain: 13 , and Pseudo-
588018 explains: ‏.הנה‎ This interpretation enables us to
recast the syntax of this sentence to be something on the order
of: "Behold (or, for) our G-d is able to save us from the ©
furnace, and from your hand He will save"!

Dan. 3:29. 190.

R. 588018 translates: ‏אלמתאל‎ , "an absurdity”. Ibn Ezra
explains: 1238, while Rashi explains: ‏שום דבר של גנא"‎ and
Pseudo-Saadia: 39190 127. It is interesting to note that ‏.א‎
‎Saadia translates in a similar way ‏כסילים תאבדם‎ Hizei(Prov.
1:32) as: ‏,וזלה אלגהאל תבידהם‎ “and the mistake of the fools
will destroy them", and explains the derivation of this trans-
lation from his understanding of the word 199 in Dan 3:29,
which he says means mistake in the language of the Targum

==== PDF page 0046 ====
44
(Biblical Aramaic). R. Saadia"s explanation of this word in
Proverbs and Daniel was adopted by Ibn Ganah, and Montgomery
too accepts this interpretation!!
Dan. 3:29. ‏.כדנה‎

R. Saadia translates: ‏,כדאלך‎ "Like this" or "thus".

What does 3t3refer to here: “like this one (G-d)", or "in
this manner"? Ibn Ezra takes it to mean: “like this G-d",
while Rashi says: ‏כזאת‎ , “in this way". Montgomery considers
R. Saadia's explanation the correct one!2

Dan. 4:14. ‏שאלתא<‎ .

R. Saadia translates: ‏רגוחב אלמסאלה‎ meaning a reply to
a question or, more clearly, a judicial response. Ibn Ezra
takes it to mean a question, but Rashi explains:  הרזג.‎

Evidence from Targum Jonathan to Jeremiah 12:1 and other sources
support R. Saadia's explanation of ‏שאלתא‎ meaning not a request,
but rather a response!
Dan. 4:24. pig.

| R. 588018 translates ‏פתפך‎ , "break off". Ibn Ezra explains:
‏,גאל‎ and Pseudo-Saadia: ‏תפדה‎ , but Rashi explains:  קורפ‎
While a later development of this root has the meaning of
“redeem", R. Saadia has translated according to the original
and, according to many modern commentators, more correct meaning
which is also more preferable on the basis of the context !4
Dan. 4:32. ‏כלה‎ .

R. 588018 translates 835 ‏לא‎ , “Like nothing". Rashi and
Pseudo-Saadia offer the Midrashic interpretation thatn? is a
type of dust seen in sun rays, but Pseudo-Saadia also mentions
the explanation: "like nothing". Montgomery finds the same

==== PDF page 0047 ====
\ | 45
use of rv in Syriac as that given here by R. Saadia!>
Dan. 4:33. ‏.הדרי‎

R. 588018 868 ‏,רבהגתד‎ “my splendor". It is not
absolutely clear here whether 17717 is a noun or a verb, and
in fact, Rashi explains: anasn, "I returned". Montgomery
considers Rashi's explanation to be based on an understanding
of later linguistic premises, while R. Saadia follows earlier
usage; and Torrey remarks that such repetition of words is
quite typical in Danie1!®
Dan. 6:1. ‏מלכותא‎ Jap ARTO ‏.ודריוש‎

2. 588018 translates:  שוירד ‏צאר אלמלך אלד‎ “the rule
became Darius'". Ibn Ezra, at the end of his comment to this
verse, explains that Darius received the rule from Cyrus,
while Marti and Charles think it means that Darius received
it from 0-7 Ibn Ezra and the other scholars thought that
‏קבל‎ must mean to receive from someone, so they were forced
to determine who gave the rule over to Darius, but R. Saadia
was of the opinion that ‏קבל מלכותא‎ had no connotation of \
taking over or receiving the rule from someone else. ‏.א‎
‎Saadia's explanation is corroborated by Syriac usage which
has ‏קבל‎ connoting a normal secular succession! ®
Dan. 6:7, 12, 16.  ושגרה.‎

This word which occurs three times, is translated three
different ways by 2. Saadia: 17R3 “came to", ‏תחכר‎ "684

==== PDF page 0048 ====
46
with", and 1238, “rushed against". The variants to these
translations are also of significance here. Ms. p, instead \
of ‏צארו‎ reads:  במאכ‎ "addressed". For ‏תחכר‎ which makes no
sense at all here (for why would Daniel's opponents quarrel
with him at a time that they were seeking incriminating
evidence against him), all the other manuscripts read: Donn
which means "probed", "sought information", “made inquiries"
or “perceived". The word 124%, which Montgomery thinks means
“rushed against" is better translated "criticized sharpiy"!?
In verse 7 Ibn Ezra explains: ‏התחברר‎ , Rashi: youn ‏,משמשר על‎
and Pseudo-Saadia: oy ‏,לשון קיבוץ‎ On verse 12 Rashi explains:
‏משמשו רחפשר‎ , and Pseudo-Saadia (on verse 11): mavia ‏היו‎
‏ואודרבים‎ In view of the confusion shown by most medieval
and modern eommentators in explaining this word, R. Saadia's
clear translation of it, each time in a way appropriate to the
context, is innovative2? The importance of checking the
manuscripts in order to correctly ascertain R. Saadia's view
is especially clear in this case.
Dan. 6:19,  ןוחדו.‎

R. Saadia translates:  אנאוכ‎ "tables". Ibn Ezra explains:
‏נגינרת רשירות‎ . Rashi, in the name of Dunash explains: ‏רשלחן‎
‏במשנה‎ (but no such Mishna can be found!). Pseudo-Saadia
explains it by metathesis to be j11n1,"delights" and says
that it refers to musicians and dancing girls. Montgomery
concludes that the meaning is unknown?! but R. Saadia explains

==== PDF page 0049 ====
47

the basis for his translation of “tables” quite clearly in
his long commentary on Daniel where he says: ,71NT1 ROR1"

פקד יפסר כואנאת ליוכל בין ידיה, רקד 333° מתל הדה אללפפה
פי תוספת כלים: הדחונות שאוכלין עליהן". \
‎R. 588018 finds the exact same word in a most obscure area of‏
‎Rabbinic Literature, the Tosefta to Kelim (ed. Zuckermandel‏
‎referred to by Dunash??‏ משנה ‎line 27) which must be the‏ 583 .סש
‎tt is no surprise, however, that modern Biblical scholarship‏
‎was not aware of this information since Zuckermandel's text‏
,"הרחוינית (!) שבטרקלינין בעלי בתים האוכלים עליהם" ‎reads:‏
‎Lest there be any doubt as to the correctness of 2. Saadia's‏
‎understanding of this word, the Tosefta itself, a line later,‏
‎which makes it clear that 8 portable table‏ "שהך כטבלה" ‎explains‏
‎made of boards is meant. R. Saadia's lasting importance for‏
‎a basic comprehension of Biblical Aramaic is never more‏
‎obvious than in this instance.‏

==== PDF page 0050 ====
NOTES TO CHAPTER I
1. Rappaport 1913: I, 134-136, 146-154.
2. See Bacher 1896 VII; and 5. Pognanski 1900 131-132.
= 3, Steinschneider 1858 XVIII; Encyclopaedia Britannica 1965

Vol. 20: 43-44, Vol. 18: 102.

4. Neubauer 1886 V.

5. Steinschneider 1965 98-99, 102-103 et passim.

6. Roth 1964 349-350; Azulai 1934, index under Tunis.

פזמרגים ‎MANS‏ לימים נרראים לפי נוסת אלג'יךר, ליוורנו, תש"ד: .6.8 .7
‎See: Hirschfeld 1897 249; Malter 1921 407; Roth 1946 399;‏
‎Yaari 1951 713.‏

8. See Fleischer 1926 XVII.

9. Goldberg1897 I.

10. See Yaari 1951 737, 820-822; Sdphir 1866 48-111. \

11. See the many works mentioned in Nahum 1971; Kafih 1954 7-13;
Kafih 1960 6-9; Liebermann 1940 3-4, 10-11, 22, 32.

12. Y. Tobi 1975 654. :

13. Saphir 1866 536, 618, 1018: Kafih 1966 14.

14. See below Chapter III.

15. Saphir 1866 2la-b. Kafih 1976 409 published a text which
indicates that the Geniza was known to Yemenite Jews during
the fourteenth century.

16. Kahle 1960 6-9; Wertheimer 1952 4

17. Kahle 1960 9-13; see also works listed by Allony 1961 423-425,
About the Basutin cemetery, see Allony 1961 412 and Ben-Zev

> 1957 8.
08

==== PDF page 0051 ====
49
18. See e.g. Malter 1921 409-419,
19, Published in Cambridge, England, 1903 by Deighton and Bell.
20. See Malter 1921 305-419; Werfel (Raphael) 1943 644-657.
21. e.g. Zucker 1959 308-317,

==== PDF page 0052 ====
NOTES TO CHAPTER 1
1. See inside cover of Bacher 1899.
2. Spiegel 1906. For other manuscripts see Neubauer 1886 881.
3. Malter 1921 277; Bacher 1896 554; Derenbourg 1892 19;
and Israelsohn 1909 277.
4. Melammed 1975 654-664, 777-778; Bacher 1875 16-40;
Gesenius 1863 XIII-XIV.
5. See Allony 1958a 365.
6. Zulay 1965 23.
7. Allony 1958b 172.
8. Segal 1936 14-15; Bendavid 1967 163-164.
9. Wilensky 1929 16-24; Barr 1968 61-62.
10. Blau 1965 19-21.
11. Altmann and Stern xxii n.l.
12. Goitein 1962 19,
13. Allony 1969 70-71; Ratzaby 1941 93.
14. Kadari 1964 213 and bibliography at end of article.
15. About 2. Saadia's use of the Yerushalmi see Poznanski 1909
6-8, 25-26.
16. Goitein 1971 6.
17. Poznanski 1904 149 n.3; Malter 1921 56-57.
18. Allony 1970 83,100.
20. Kafih 1972 78; Allony 1970 93-97. ;
21. Epstein 1915 53-57; Mann 1931;I, 446 n.2 and 554 n.1;
Baneth 1946 152; Morag 1960 220-221; Morag 1964 130;
Blau 1965 19-22,
22. Epstein 1915 32-33.
50

==== PDF page 0053 ====
\ 1
23. Halkin 1975 126.
24. Ibid., note to line 66; Abramson 1974 245 n.2.
25. Allony 1969 27-29, 70-71, 159 lines 52-55; Barr 1968 62.
26. Malter 1912-1913 498 lines 15-17. |
27. Allony 1969 70-71, 337; Davidson et. al. 1963 5 line 6.

==== PDF page 0054 ====
/
NOTES TO CHAPTER III
1. Spiegel 1906 15.
2. Steinschneider 1897 2; It was purchased from the ill fated
convert Shapira in 1879 or 1881.
3. Cohn 1889 4; Bacher 1899 VIII; Derenbourg 1894 VIII;
Kafih 1966 15; 1973 7; 1976 6. Kafih says that he did
not consult this Ms. but relied on Derenbourg (1976 3),
however, on p. 6, it is clear from the colophon referred
to that Kafih did use it but simply was hot aware of its
9 torigin. For 8 facsimile of the colophon see Kafih 1962 9,
3a. For an accurate evaluation of Spiegel's work; cases where
he felt there was a lacuna in the text of Ms. ‏ב‎ are listed
here: Dan. 2:23 [eax] - none of the Mss. agree; Dan 3:4
‏[אלשפוב]‎ - supported by ‏א) קת‎ has ‏(אלשדב‎ ; Dan 5 ‏[דג יאל‎ .
supported by all the Mss.; Dan. 4:7 [rm sv ‏[ורפצהא‎ - these
words are also missing in 12, while nip add other words;
Dan 4:20 - there is 8 large lacuna in ‏ב‎ with part of
Spiegel's reconstruction confirmed and part denied by the
Mss; Dan. 6;9 ‏ב - איי₪‎ has 77%, while ‏קות‎ have ‏איה‎ which
supports Spiegel's correction; Dan. 6311, 14 for] -
supported by all Mss.
Spiegel's corrections made in his notes are frequently
clearly opposed by information available from the other
manuscripts. See especially variants to Dan. 4:8, 12, 24,
27, 30; 5:1; 6:5, 11, 14; 7;5, 9,21,25.
Many of the Berlin manuscripts were found after the war
52

==== PDF page 0055 ====
53
in Tubingen and Hamburg (see Allony and Loewinger, ‏רשימת‎
‏,תצלומי כתבי-יד העבריים במכוך‎ Part 1, Jerusalem
1957, p.22) but I was not able to locate this one. Although
Kafih used a facsimile of it he did not provide exact in-
\ formation about its location, but a thorough search
among the microfilms of the Ben-Zvi Institute which he
consulted, may bring it to light.

4. Neubauer 1886 882.

5. Morag 1973 13.

6. Ibid.

7. S. A. Birnbaum 1971 251, 1954-1957 plate no.222. See
below pp. 36, 38 where the possibility of late manuscripts
preserving early variants is mentioned.

8. Katsh 1963 16. Dr. ‏.ם‎ Hurvitz was kind enough to make
this fragment accessible to me.

9. Mann 1920-1922 Vol. I 92; Vol. II 90 line 17, 99 no. 20(5),
115 no. 31(1).

10. See e.g. 2.2. Halper ‏התקופה‎ 19 (1923): 236.
11. See Goitein 1971

==== PDF page 0056 ====
NOTES TO CHAPTER IV
1. Spiegel 1906 9-15; Ms. x 85b.
2. See e.g. Leveen 1935 107-108.
3. Zucker 1959 280. | :
4. See P. Birnbaum 1942 xx-xxi.
5. Halkin 1943 282-283.
6. Ratzaby 1960 172.
7. Ratzaby 1964 244.
8. Kahle 1960 55 note 3.
9. Ibid. note 2.
10. Zucker 1959 286-290. /
11. Kafih 19638 6, 8.
12. Abramson 1974 40-42.
13. Derenbourg 1893 VIII; Steinschneider 1964 56; Eppenstein 1913
81; Malter 1921 308.
14. Derenbourg 1893 2-4.
15. See Skoss 1959 303, Zucker 1951 21, Zucker 1955-56 311.
16. Derenbourg 1893 4.
17. Kafih 1963a 160.
18. Wehr 1971 231-233. Ratzaby 1946 54 verse 23,
19. Kafih 1973 29 line 15. See also Allony 1969 152 line 1
where R. Saadia uses ‏כ'רוג‎ to mean publication.
20. Kafih 1963a 160.
21. Wehr 1971 713.
22. See Zucker 1959 269-270.
23. Mann 1921 425.
24. See Malter 1921 316, 407, 427.
25. Mann 1921 427.
54

==== PDF page 0057 ====
26. Wehr 1971 384.

27. Poznanski 1923 379-380.

28. See Weisenberg 1959 538-539.

29. See Mann 1921 426. \

30. Schroter 1866 5 (no. 13).

31. But see Zucker 1959 271, who feels that Dunash totally
misunderstood 2. 588018 and presented his view incorrectly.
While this may be true, the fact that Dunash says that
R. Saadia brings a proof from Job 21:18 is enough for us,
since this indicates that it is a commentary,not a
translation that is being referred to.

32. Kafih 1963b 334-335. It is mentioned also by Abramson
1965 202 (but missing in his index!), and Kafih 1963a 42
note 1 to Gen. 37, who claims that it is from R. Saadia's
long commentary on the Torah!

33. Kafih, see above, note 32.

34. Bacher 1899 Ix.

35. Ratzaby 1955 317.

36. Zucker 1959 292.See also indices to Leveen 1935 and Neubauer

37. Mann 1921 425 lines 18-19. See also Steinschneider 1964
ff. 57.

38. Poznanski 1902 364-372; Poznanski 1923 384, 387-389. See
also Malter 1921 321-325. ,

39. Kafih 1962

40. See Morag 1964 118-119 et passim; Morag 1960 233-234.

41. Malter 1919 55.

==== PDF page 0058 ====
| 56
‘42, See my edition on Dan. 4:15 and 5:15.
43. See 2. Saadia’s Ms. commentary on Dan. 2:35 and 4:30.
44. Goitein 1971 236-237.
45. Fried 1966 173-174.
46. 21922 ‏לשון הקדש ללערבי, אלגזאיר,‎ Ja ‏הנביא, מתרגם‎ PRIA
47. See e.g. variants to Dan. 2:10, 13, 24, 28, 34.

==== PDF page 0059 ====
NOTES TO CHAPTER V

1. Published in Edinburgh as part of The International Critical
Commentary.

2. Montgomery 1927 148.

3. Ibid. 149.

4. Ibid. 150.

5. Ibid. 151.

6. See Allony 1969 50, 337 (but compare above, note 27 to
Chapter II); Montgomery 1927 153, and Jastrow's dictionary
under Dil

7. Montgomery 1927 154.

8. Ibid. 207.

9. Ibid. 208.

10. Ibid. 209.
| 11. See Spiegiel 1906 ‏א‎ note 19, Kafih 19768 30; Bacher 1896
515-516, Montgomery 1927 219.
12. Montgomery 1927 219.
13. Ibid. 237.
14. Ibid. 240, 242.
15. Ibid. 246.
16. Ibid.
17. Ibid. 267.
18. Ibid.
19. See Wehr 1971 174,455 and Montgomery 1927 272.
20. Montgomery 1927 272.
21. Ibid. 278.
22. Ms.R 666-67a. 57

==== PDF page 0060 ====
58
23. R. Saadia's explanation and reference to the Tosefta is
quoted by Kimhi ) ‏השרשים‎ 199, ed. Biesenthal and Lebrecht,
\ Berlin 1847) but not in his name.

==== PDF page 0061 ====
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abramson, S.
1965 ‏,ירושלים : מקיצי נרדמים.‎ IRA ‏רב נסים‎
1974 ‏עוייגנות בספרות הגאונים ג,ירושלים : מוסד הרב קוק,‎
Allony, ‏.א‎
‎18 ‏בתוך‎ 366-362 Say , ‏מיכה ב"שבעים מלים בודדות" לרס"ג‎
‏פרסומי החברה לחקר המקרח בישראל, ספר ה', לזכר פמואל‎
‏דים, בעריכת ח, בר-דרומא, ח,מ,י, גבריהו וב"צ לוריח,‎
‏ירושלים+ ההברה לחקר המקרת* בישראל,‎
Allony, ‏.א‎
‎1958b ‏כתאב אלסבעין לפט'ה לרב טספעדיה גאון,פם* קלג-קפ בתוך‎
‏ספר זכרון לכבוד פרופ* יצתק יהודה גולדציהך ח"ב,‎
‏שייבר, י, שומוג'י,‎ CR ‏ערוך ע"י ד,ש, לוינגר,‎
‏ירושלים,‎
‎Allony, ‏.א‎
‎11 ‏גנדזה וכתבי-יד עבריים בספריות קמברידג', ארשת ג*:‎
0425-395
Allony, N.
1969 ‏התגרון,,,מאת רב סעדיה גחון, ירושלים: האקדמיה‎
\ ‏ללשון העברית,‎
Allony, ‏.א‎
‎1970 ‏עלי בן יהודה הנזיר ותיבורו "יסודות הלשון העברית",‎
2209-187 ,105-75 ‏לד:‎ 133307
Altman, A. and Stern, S. M.
1958 Isaac Israeli. Oxford University Press.
Azulai, H.J.D.
1934 ‏ספר מעגל פוב השלם, ירושלם: מקיצי נרדמים,‎
59

==== PDF page 0062 ====
00
Bacher, ‏.א‎ \
1875 Abraham Ibn Esra's Einleitung zu Seinem Pentateuch-
Commentar. Wien: Karl Gerold.
Bacher, W.
1896 ‏מפב הערעים .,.חברו,,,ר' יונה בן גנאת, ברלין:‎
‏מקיצי נרדמים,.‎
Bacher, ‏.א‎
‎19 ‏פבגום ספר איוב וביחורו בלשון ערבית לרבינו סעדיה‎
‏גחאון, פאריס: ארנסט לרו.‎
Baneth, , 4. /
1946 ‏התנוין בהתפתתותו למלה נפרדת במכסטים פרביים-יהודיים.‎
,153-141 ‏ידיעות החברה לחקירת א"ר רעתיקותיה י"ב:‎
Barr, J.
1968 Comparative Philology and the Text of the Old
Testament. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Ben-Zev, I.
1957 ‏תעודות על בית-הקברות היהודי הקדום בקהיר, ספונות‎
‏ז-בד,‎ 2°R
Bendavid, A.
1967 ‏לפוך מקרא ולשון חכמים. תל-אביב: דביר,‎
Birnbaum, ‏וע‎ 72%"
1942 The Arabic Commentary of Yefet Ben Ali the Karaite
on the Book of Hosea. Philadelphia: Dropsie College.

==== PDF page 0063 ====
61
Birnbaum, S.A.
1971 The Hebrew Scripts. Part 1. Leiden: E.J. Brill.
1954-1957 The Hebrew Scripts. Part 2. London: Palaeographia.
Blau, J.
1965 The Emergence and Linguistic Background of Judeo-Arabic.
Oxford University Press.
Cohn, J.
1889 ‏איוב אלמלקב בכתאב תלתעדיל‎ ARNI
Das Buch Hiob ubersetzt_und erklart vom Gaon 8.
Altona: Gebruder Bonn.
Davidson, I.
1963 Assaf, 5. and Joel, B.I.
‏סדור רב סעדיה גאון. מהדורה שניה, ירושלים: מקיצר נרדמום‎
Derenbourg, J. ‏בהוצאת ר,8ל.‎
1 1892 0105858 D*Abou Zakariya Ben 21188 sur 15810. Paris.
Derenbourg, J.
1893 ‏תרגום תמשה חורמשי תורה בלשון פרבית לרבינו סעדיה‎
‏גאון, פאריס: ארנסט לדו,‎
Derenbourg, J. and Lambert, M. -
1894 ‏תרגום ספר משלי וביאורו בלשוך ערבית,.,לרבינו סעדיה‎
‏גאון, פאריס: ארנסט לרו,‎
Eppenstein, =
1913 Beitrage zur Geschichte und Literatur im Geonischen
Zeitalter. Berlin: Louis Lamm.
Epstein, J.N.
1915 Der Gaondische Kommentar zur Ordnung Tohoroth. Berlin:
Mayer & Muller.

==== PDF page 0064 ====
62
Fleischer, L.
1926 ‏עורא לספר שמות,,,עם פרוש משנה לעזרא,וינה:‎ PIR ‏ספר‎
‏מנורה,‎
‎Fried, ‏.א‎
‎106 .174-166 ‏פניינות מגילת אנטיוכוס, ארשת ד:‎
Gesenius, W.
1863 Hebraisches und Chaldaisches Handworterbuch uber das
Alte Testament. Sechste Auflage. Leipzig; F.C.W. Vogel.
Goitein, S.D.
1962 ‏סדרי חינוך בימי הגאונים ובית הרמב"ם, ירושלים: מכוך‎
‏בן צבי-האוניברסיפה העברית,‎
Goitein, S.D.
\ 1971 A Mediterranean Society. Vol. II. Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Goldberg, B.
1867 ‏מעשה נסים הן הגה שאלות 1327 דניאל 99230 על ספר‎ nan
‏המצות של הרמב"ם,פריט,‎
Halkin, A.S.
1943 The Relation of the Samaritans to Saadia Gaon. Pp.271-325
in Saadia Anniversary Volume. Ed. B. Cohen. New York:
American Academy for Jewish Research.
Halkin, A.S.
1975 ‏העיונים והדיונים, ירושלים:‎ WD ‏עזרחא:‎ YAR ‏משה בן יעקב‎
‏מקיצי נרדמום,‎
Hirschfeld, H.
1897 Noitzuber einen dem Maimuni untergschobenen arabischen
Commentar zu Esther. Pp. 248-253 in Semitic Studies
in Memory of Rev. Dr. Alexander Kohut. ed. G.A. Kohut.

==== PDF page 0065 ====
53
‎Berlin: S. Calvary.‏
‎Israelsohn, J. \‏
פורוש על ספר ירמיה 1299 יהודה 72 בלעם,עפם' 308-273 1909
בתוך זכרון לאברהם אליהו ערוך ע"י ד, גינצבורג וד, ד,
מארקאן,פטרבורג.:
‎Kadari, M.Z.‏
מגילת אנסמיוכס הארמית ח"א,בר-אילך א:1-א105-81,7. 1963
‎NIAID‏ חנטיוכס הארמית ח"ב, בר-אילך ב: 2214-178 1964
‎Kafih, J.‏
ספר גן השכלים לרבינו נתנאל זצ"ל בירב פידמ*י וצ"ל, 1954
ירושלם: האגודה להצלת גנזי תימן,
‎Kafih, J.‏
הרד"ף למסכת חוליך עם פירוש בשפה הערבית לאחד מחכמי יהדות ‏ 1960
תימן,ירדשלם: האגודה להצלת גנזי תימך,
‎Kafih, J.‏
חמש מגילות,,,עם פירושים פתיקים,ירושלים: האגודה להצלת 1962
גנזי תימן.,
‎Kafih, J.‏
פובושי רבינו סעדיה גאוך על התורה,ירוסלים: מוסד הרב 19630
‎«PIP‏
‎Kafih, J.‏
גרדומי פנינים מספר בכ"י תימני קדום,תלפיות ‎1963b fain *n‏
ג-דז 356-111.
‎Kafih, J.‏
תהלים ‎ov‏ תרגום ופירוש הגאון רביגו סעדיה,ירושלם. 1966
‎oa.‏ ודו שת

==== PDF page 0066 ====
64
Kafih, J.
1972 ‏ספר יבירה עם פירוש הגאון רבנו ספדיה. הועד להוצאת‎
. ‏ספרי רס"ג,‎
Kafih, J.
1973 ‏תרגום ופירוש הגאון רבנו סעדיה, ירושפלים.‎ oy ‏איוב‎
‎Kafih, J.
1976a ‏מסלי עם תרגום ופירוש הגאון 1337 סעדיה, ירושלים.‎
Kafih, J.
1976b ‏שיעור קומה,‎ 6p ‏שריד מחיבור תימני עתיק בענייני‎
‏תז-תי בתוך: יהדות תימך: בעריכת י, ישעיהו רי,‎ ‘fay
‏טפובי, ירושלים: יד בן-צבי.‎
Kahle, P.
1904 Die Arabischen Bibelubersetzungen. Leipzig: J.C. Hinrich.
1960 The Cairo Geniza. Second edition. New York: Praeger. \
Katsh, A.I.
1963 The Antonin Genizah in the Saltykov-Schedrin Public
Library in Leningrad. N.Y. (Offprint from The Leo
Jung Jubilee Volume pp. 115-131).
Leveen, J.
1935 Catalogue of the Hebrew_and Samaritan Manuscripts
in the British Museum, Part IV. London.
Liebermann, S.
1940 ‏מדרשי תימך. ירושלים: במברגר את וואהרמן.‎
Malter, H.
1912-1913 Saadia Studies I. Jewish Quarterly Review.
| n.s.3: 487-499.
Malter, H.
1919 Saadia Gaon's Messianic Computation. Journal of
Jewish Lore and Philosophy. 1:45-59.

==== PDF page 0067 ====
65
Malter, H.
1921 Saadia Gaon, His Life and Works. Philadelphia: JPSA.
Mann, J.
1920-1922 The Jews in Egypt and in Palestine Under the
Fatamid Caliphs. 2 Vols. Oxford University Press.
Mann,.J.
1921 A Fihrist of Sa'tadyas Works. JQR n.s. XI: 423-428,
Mann, J.
1931 Texts and Studies in Jewish History and Literature.
Vol. I. Cincinnati: Hebrew Union College Press.
Melammed, E.Z.
1975 ‏מפרשי המקרא,ירושלים: מאגנט, האוניברסיטה העברית,‎
Morag, S.
1960 ‏"שבע כפולות בגד כפרת",צם'242-207 בתוך פרטומי החברה‎
‏לכבוד הפדפ' 1,ה,‎ gain ‏לחקך המקרא בישראל, ספר ח',‎
‏מור-סיני , בעריכת ם, הרן וב"צ לוריא, ירושלים4 החברה‎
‏לחקר המקרא בישראל ע"י קרית ספר.‎
Morag, S.
1964 Biblical Aramaic in Geonic Babylonia. Pp. 117-130 in
Studies in Egyptology and Linguistics in Honour of
H.J. Polotsky. ed. H.B. Rosen. Jerusalem. Israel
Exploration Society.
Morag, S.
1973 ‏עפר דניאל, כתב-יד בבלי-תימנו. ירושליח: קרית ספר,‎
Nahum, Y.L.
1971 ‏תימן,‎ A732 ‏גנוזים מתימן, הולון: מפעל תשיפת‎ Asn

==== PDF page 0068 ====
6
Neubauer, A.
1886 Catalogue bf the Hebrew Manuscripts in the Bodleian
Library. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Poznanski, S.
1900 Tanhoum Yerouschalmi. Revue des Etudes Juives.
XL: 129-153; XLI: 45-61.
Poznanski, S.
1902 Miscellen uber Saadja, IV. Saad jas Ubersetzung zum
Buch Ester, Monatsschrift fur Geschichte und Wissenschaft
des Judentums. XLVI: 364-372/ ,
Poznanski, S.
1904 Ephraim ben Schemaria de Fostat. REJ XLVIII: 145-175.
Pognanski, S. \
1909 ‏עגינים שוניס הנוגעים לתקופת הגאונים,ווארש".‎
Poananski, S.
1923 A Fihirst of Saadya's Works. 108 n.s. XIII: 369-396,
Rappaport, S.
\ 1913 | ‏תולדות,וורשה: הצפירה.‎
Ratzaby, Y.
1941 2106692 ‏גאון, תרביץ י"ג:‎ ATID 139179 ‏תרגום אדכה‎
Ratzaby, Y.
1946 256-46 ‏שרידים מביאור הרס"ג לישעיה, תרביךץ ו"ח:‎
Ratzaby. Y.
199 1960 ‘ay ‏תרגום פרבי למגדלת רות מבית מדרשד של הרס"ג,‎
‏בתוך פרסומי החברה לחקר המקרא בישראל,ספר י',‎ 1

==== PDF page 0069 ====
7
לזכך בצבי קארל בעריכת א, ורייזר ‎S817‏ לוריא, יררשלים: החברה
לחקר המקרא בדשראל ע"ד הוצאת קדות ספר,.
‎Ratzaby, Y.‏
על תפסיר רב סעדיה למקרח, ‎‘ay‏ 250-237 בתוך כתבי החברה 1964
לחקר המקרא ביטראל, לזכר ד"ר י,פ, קורנגריך. תל-אביב:
החברה לחקר המקרא בושראל ע"י הוצאת ניב,
‎Roth, C.‏
‎The History of the Jews of Italy. Philadelphia: JPSA.‏ 1946
‎R. Saadia Gaon‏
תפסיר רס"ג לספר דנואל, מקרא ותרגום ערבי , צילום כתב יד | 1971
עתיקץ מתימן,ישראל.
‎Saphir, J.‏
אבן ספיר .א-ב, לדק-מגנצא. 1866-1874
‎Schechter, S. \‏
‎Cambridge: Deighton and Bell.‏ .58807808 1903
.ה ‎Schroter,‏
‏ספר תשובות דדנש הלוד 92 לברס על רבי סעדיה גאוך. 1866
ברסלאו,
‎Segal, M.Z.‏
דקדוק לשון המשנה, תל-אביב: דביר, 1936

==== PDF page 0070 ====
68
Skoss, S.
1959 ‏מפירושו הארוך של רב טעדיה גאון על בראסית כב,כ-כג,‎
.324-503 ‏יח;כה, כת-כו,תרביץ כ"ת:‎
Spiegel, H.
1906 8 al-Fajjumi's arabische Danielversion. Berlin.
Steinschneider, M.
1858 Catalogus Codicum Hebraeorum Bibliothecae Academiae
Lugduno-Batavae. Lugduni-Batavorum: E.J. Brill.
Steinschneider, M.
1897 Verzeichniss der hebraeischen Handschriften. Zweite
Abtheilung. Berlin: A. Asher.
Steinschneider, M.
1964 Die arabische Literatur der Juden. Reprint. Hildesheim:
Olms.
Steinschneider, M.
1965 ‏הרב קוק.‎ TOW ‏הרכאות על כתבד יד עבריים, ירושלים:‎
Tobi, Y.
1975 ‏שרידים חדשום מפירוש רב סעדיה גאון לספר ישעיהו,‎
.662-654 ‏קרית ספר  ם:‎
Wehr, H.
1971 A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic. Third edition..
Ithaca, New York: Spoken Language Services, Inc.

==== PDF page 0071 ====
59
‎Weisenberg, E.‏
‎M1795‏ רבינו אברהם ‎Ja‏ הרמב"ם ז"ל על בראשית ושמות, 1959
י'ע פ-------
‎Werfel (Raphael), I.‏
מלואים לביבליוגרפיה,פעפמ' תרמד-תרנז בתוך רב סעדיה 1943
גאוך בעריכת י, ל, הכהן פישמן, ירושלים: ‎Told‏ הרב |
קוק.
‎Wertheimer, S.A.‏
בתי מדרשות, ת"א, ירושלים: מדטסד הרב ‎.PIp‏ 1952
‎Wilensky, M.‏
ספר ‎ABpIA‏ לר'* יונה אבן גנאת, ברלין: האקדמיה 1929
למדעד הדהדות,
‎Yaari, A.‏
שלותי ‎PIR‏ ישראל, ירושלים: מוסד הרב קוק, 1951
‎Zucker, M.‏
על תרגום רס"ג לתורה, ניו-יורק: פעלדהיים, 1959
.א ‎Zulay,‏
‏החסכולה הפוסנית של רס"ג, ירדשלים: מכון שוקן. 1964
‎Zucker, 4.‏
חלקו של ר' סעדיה גאון בפולמוס ממחרת השבת. 1951
‎Proceedings of the American Academy for Jewish Research‏
‎XX : 1-26.‏
‎Zucker, M.‏
מפרושו של רס"ג לתורה, סורא ב : 355-393 1955-56

==== PDF page 0073 ====
קייא "7 --ר -%
ו -
7 =
ו
7
/
הי
0
ור 0
- 0 0
-.--.
..
‎a‏
‎i . | |‏
בי >" 42 2 .
0 0 =
0 \
רו
- ו

==== PDF page 0074 ====
תפסיר רבינו סעדיה גחוך
על החלק הארמי של ספר דניאל
‎OD‏ השווחות 99 פי כתב*" דד
וקפמעים מגניזת קהיר
רעם מבוא באנגלות
‎ARO‏
‎PRIDE‏ אהרן קליין

==== PDF page 0075 ====
2
רשימת סימנים רקצורים
ח' = תסר, כלומר: לא ‎RADI‏ בכ"י אבל הכ"ד אינו ‎DIAS‏ באותו מקוס.
חסר = הכ"ד פגום באותו מקום,
נ' = נוסף.
[ ] = בסכסס, השלמה פ"פ ההשערה; בשינויים, חור בכ"י,
= ממדשסש, והקריאה אינה ברורה,
.4 ,”= מסושטש, אבל מספר החאותיות ברור,
1 ,2 ,3 1
לסומני כתבד היד: תא,ב,ג',ג",ג7,ל,ק,ק',ת עיין בחלק האנגלי
‎fay‏ 21-16.
/ = חם ‎WR‏ רדות בין סימן זה לאותיות שלפניו רשלאהריו,
מובנו שבכ"י יש שורה חדשה; אהרת, סימן זה מבדיל ביך
שינויים שונים לאותה מלה בטכסס,

==== PDF page 0076 ====
‘a pis

כתבד דד: א,ל,ק,ק',ת.

אן 39 אלסנה אלתאניה מן מלך בכתנצר ראד הלמא פכרב רותה ותנגץ
נומה, | ‎me‏
‏פי/ ופי לק'ת. |
אלתאניה. אלב' ל / אלתאנייה ת.
בכתנבר/, בכתנ' ל / ‎nda‏ נצר ת.
‎JIRA‏ ראא ק'ת. |

ב, ‎WRI‏ באן ‎ROT‏ באלחכמא ואלמנגמין ואלסחרה ואלכסדאניין
ליערפוה רויאה ‎TRA‏ ווקפו בין ידיה, .
ואלכסדאניין/ ואלכסדאנין ל,
ליערפוה/ ליערפונה ק'ת.
ווקפו/, פוקפו ל,

ג, פקאל להם אלמלך קד ראית רויא פכרב רותי ‎VR‏ אן אערפה,
אן/ ‎Sn‏ ונשלם למעלה מהשורה ‎ar‏ ; /

ד, פכלמוה באלנבטיה אמאל אללה ‎WIR RPI‏ קל אלרויא לעבידך
ננברך בתפסירהא: ;
באלנבמיה/ באלנבטייה ק'ת.
נכברך/. ונכברך ק'ת.

ה, אגאבהם פקאל קד גד מני אלאמר באנכם אן ‎OF‏ תערפוני אלרווא
רתפסירהא אפצחא תפעלון וביותכם צואפי תציירון, |
פקאל/ רקאל קית. : |
אעבאא/, ‎RETR‏ ת.
תציירון/ יתציירון ‎np‏

==== PDF page 0077 ====
4
‎pag‏ ב'
ו, ואן אלרויא ותפסירהא תכברונד הבאת וגואיז ווקר ועז כתיר
תרפעון ‎Yo‏ קדאמי לדאלך אלרויא ותפסירהא אכברונ5ל
תנכברוני/. תכברון ק'ת;
רוקר/ ווקאר ‎in'p‏ |
כתיר/ כביר ק'ת.
ד אגאבוה תאגית וקאלו אלמלך יקול אלרויא לעבודה 77253
בתפסירהתא,
תאבית/ ‎wip fn‏
לפבודה/, ח' ק'ת.
ננכברה/, פנכברה ק'ת.
ח, אגאבהם וקאל ‎WIR‏ לאעלם יקינא אנכם אבמא תשתרון סאעתכם ודאלך
למא ראיתם גד אלאמר מני,
וקאל/ פקאל לקית. )
אני/ ‎133K‏ ק'ת.
לאפלם/] לאיתאעלם 222
ודאלך/. ודאך 2 / ודאך ק'ת.
₪, באנכם ‎oF TR‏ תערפוני אלרויא פסבילכם ‎KINKI‏ ואנמא קד אעתדתם
כלאם אלכדב ואלזור ‎TR‏ תקולוה בין ידי ‎TR WR‏ תתגייך אלסאעה
ותבגלי לכן ‎WIP‏ לי ‎ART‏ אלרויא ‎TAN‏ אעלם אצכם צאדקין פי
אכבארי ותפסירהא,
ואחדא/, ואחדה 2 / ואחד ק'ת.
קד ‎wp tn‏
‎/ontnyr‏ אעדדתם 2
אלבלב/. 173 ל / ‎ata‏ ק'ת.
ואלזור/ וזור לקות.
‎in‏ ידוי ת.
‎LVR‏ אלא ‎oD‏
‏תתגייר/. תתגיר לק!.
ותפסירהא/, בתפסירהא לק'ת,

==== PDF page 0078 ====
5
‎pag‏ 2“
י, אגאבו אלכסדאניין בחצרה אלמלך וקאלו ‎VID‏ אנסאן עלי אלארץ
יקדר אן יכבר ‎PAIR MRP ROI‏ ודאלך אן כל מלך גליל וסלטאך
עצים לם יסאל קט מתל הדא אלאמר לאד חכים או מנגם או כסדאני.
אגאבו/, אגאב ל / אגאבוה ק'ת. \ ן
אלכסדאניין/ אלכסדאנין ל / אלכפדאניין ‎oD‏ |
בהצרה/ בחצרת ת.
אנסאן/ אנסן ל.
או(1)/ או אך ב.
ודאלך/. ודלך ל.
עביס/ ח' לקית.
יסאל/ 907 2.
הדא הדא ‎wip‏
‏אלאמר/. אלקול לק'ת.
לאי/ לאיי 2, '
יע, ואלתמר אלדי וסאל ענה אלמלך עזיז ‎DIDI‏ אבר סואנא איצא יקדר
אן יכברה ‎ROA‏ קאל אלא אלםלאיכה אלדי לוע משכנוש מע אלבאט,
יסאל/ וסל 2. דר ‎a‏ \ \ 0
אוצעא/ איצ' ל / ‎Bin‏
‏יכברה/ יבבר ‎sp‏
‏במא/ במא ת.
‎RoI‏ קאל/ בהא ל. \
קאל/ ב': אלמלך ק.
אלא] אלד 5. >
אלדי(2)/ אלתי ל.
יב, ‎PRT Taya‏ שאט אלמלך וסלט גדא ואמר באבאדה גמיע תכמא באבל, “
דאלך/. דלך ל. ן |
וסכמ/ ומבט ל / וצבס ק.
באבאדה/ בקתל ק.

==== PDF page 0079 ====
6 : ,
‎pas‏ 2“
יג, וכרג אלתוקיע בדאלך והודא יקתלון אלחכמא וכאד דניאל
וחאצחאבה אן יקתלון.
אלתוקיע/ אלתיקיע 2.
בדאלך/ בדלך 2.
והודא/] והודא קת.
\ יקתלון/ יקתלו לקת.
יד, חיניל רפע דניאל ‎Asp‏ אלי אריוך רייס סיאפי אלמלך אלדד 493
אן יקתל חכמא באבל,
היניד-באבל/ חסר בחלקו ל.
חיניד/ חינד ת.
קצה/] אלקבה ק.
רייס/ ריס ל.
סיאפי/ סייאפי ת.
נפד] ב': פי ל.
מו, יסאלה ויקול עלי מא דא אלאמר ‎ARN‏ מן ‎Tay‏ אלמלך חיניד ערפה
ארירך אלקצה,
יסאלה-אלקצה/ ‎ron‏ בחלקו ל,
יסאלה/ וסאלה ת / ג': דניאל ת.
ויקול/ וקאל ת. \
אריוך/ אריוך ת.
אלקצה/, קצה ת.
פז, פתסבב דניאל ‎WR‏ אן סאל אלמלך אן ינצרה אגלא חתי יפרפה
אלרויא ותפסירהא,
פתסבב-ותפסירהא/ ‎ron‏ בחלקו ל.

==== PDF page 0080 ====
7
+
‎pis‏ ב .
יז, חיניד ‎ARB‏ דניתאל אלו ‎ANIA‏ וערף חנניה מישאל רעזריה אצתאבה
אלקבה,
חיניד-אלקצה/ ‎avn‏ בחהלקו 2.
יח, וראגתמעו אך ילתמסו אלרחמה ‎ja‏ ענד אלרב פ+ הדא אלסר לילא
יהלכון דניאל ואצתאבה מע באקי ‎RODIN‏ באבל.
ואגתמפו-באבל/ ‎Jon‏ ברובו ל.
אלרב/ רב ל / ג': אלסמא ל.
הוא/ הדי ק / הדי' ‎wh‏
‏אלסר/ אלסר ת.
לילא/ ללא קת.
ים, חינול כשף אללה דאלך ‎WIR‏ לדניאל ‎IS‏ רויא אלליל ‎NAVD‏ דניאל
רב אלסמתח, \ \
חיניל-אלסמא/ חסר ברובו 2.
כ. באן קאל יכון אסם אללה מבארכא ‎JO‏ אוול אלעאלם אלו אכרה אלדי
אלחכמה ואלגברווה לה.
אוול/ אול 2.
. -
אכרה/. אכרה .
אלחכמה/ אלחכם ת.
כא, והו מגייר אלאוקאת ראלאזמאן עאזל מלוך ונאצב מלוך מעטי
אלחכמה לאלחכמא ואלעלם לפארפי אלפהם, \
כב, והו כאשף אלעמיקאת ראלמסתוראת רפלם מא ‎TS‏ אלצלמאת ואלנור
סאכן ענדה, \ \
אלצלמאת/ אלמלמאת 2.

==== PDF page 0081 ====
8
‎‘apis‏
‏כג, לך יא אלאה אבאינא שאכר ומסבת [אנ] למא קד רזקתני ‎qo‏
‏אלחכמה ואלגברווה ואלאן ערפתני מא ‎WORD‏ והי מסאלה אלמלך,
אלאה/ אלה 2.
אבאינא/, אבעיי ל / 1': אנא ל.
רמסבה/, מסבח לע.
מסאלה/ מסלה ל / מסאלת ת,
כד, ‎Tay‏ דאלך צאר דנואל ‎WR‏ אריוך אלדי ולאה אלמלך ליביד הכמא
באבל לא תביד ‎INR‏ מנהם אדפלני אלד אלמלך אערפה אלרויתא
ותפסירהא,
עבד/ פעבד לקת.
דאלך/ דלך ל.
אריוך//, אריוךף ‎oR‏
‏באבל/ 363 פקאל לה לקת,.
תביד/ ‎yan‏ קת.
אחד/, אחדא לקת.
כה, חיניד אריוך במבאדרה אד5ל דניאל אלי אלמלך וקאל לה אניד קד
וגדת רגל מן אהל גלוה אליהוד ידכר אנה יערף אלמלך אלרויא
ותפסירהא,
אריוך/, אריוך 5. |
קד ‎‘n‏ ק.
רגל/ רגלא ל.
גלוה/ אלגלוה קת / ‎fa‏ אלדי מן ם.
ידכר/ ידכל ת.

==== PDF page 0082 ====
9
פרק ‎‘a‏
‏כו, אבתדאה אלמלך וקאל יא בלטשאצר הל תקדר ‎YR‏ תערפני אלרויא
אלדי ראיתהא ותפסירהא, .
אבתדאה/ פאבתדאה לק / פאבתדא ת.
ית/ ב': דניאל אלד1 לקבך 2.
בלטשאצר/ בלטשבר ל / בלט שצר 5 / בלט/58ר 2 ‎ .‏ .
אלדי/ אלתי לק.
ראיתהא/ ראית ת.
כז, אגאבה דניאל וקאל אלסר אלדו אלתמסה אלמלך לא אלהכמא
ואלמנגמין ואלכסדאניין ואלחכאם יקדרון אן יכברון בה,
אלתמסה/ ילתמסה ל / אלתמס ק / אלתמפה 2. -'
ראלכסדאבייך/ ראלכסדאנין ל . |
בה/ נ': אלמלך ת. |
כח, לא כך אלאלאה אלדי פי אלסמא ‎YORI‏ אלאטראר ‎FIV‏ אלמלך בכתנצר
במא סיכון ‎IS‏ אלא3ר אלזמאן פרויאך ומא נצרא עיניך עלי
מצגעך הו הדי אלדי אקולה, / |
לא כן/ לכן לקת. \
אלאלאה/ ח' ל.
‎for‏ ח* 49
אלסמא/ 353 רב ל.
כאשף/ יכשף לת / וכאשף ‎PB‏
‏אלמלך/ ח' קע.
אלמלך בכתנצר/ בכת/נצר אלמלך ת.
בלתבצר/ נ': אלמלך ל. 0/0
במא] מא לקת. יוכיד >
אלאבר/ אכר ל / אכר קת.
נברא/ נמרת ל / גבצרתה ק.
עיביך/, פינאך לקת.
הדי/ הדא ל / הלא ת.

==== PDF page 0083 ====
10

‘a pas

כמ, יא אלה אלמלך כאן אפכארך קבל נומך חארת פי מא יכון בעד ‎ATA‏
‎ORRIN‏ פאטעפך כאשף אלאסראר באן ערפך דאלך. .
יא-דאלך/, מסושסש בחלקו א / חסר ברובו ל.
יא אלה יא ‎rate‏ אק'ת / יחיהח 2.
כאן/ כאנת א.
חארת/ תאלת אפ'ת.
פי מא] פומא ‎oR‏
‎fata‏ הלא ‎wip‏
‏כאשף/ כאשפך ת.
ערפך/ יערפך ‎oR‏

| דעלך/, דלך 8.

ל ואנא פליט לאני אחכם אלנאס כשף לד הדא אלסר 139 בסבב אלדי
יערפון אלמלך אלתפטסיר 1991 תערף מראד 27083
ראנא-נפסך/ מטושסש ‎TRO‏ א.
‎/RIR1‏ ראני' ‎np‏
‏לאני/ ח* ‎Jp‏ / אנא ת.
139/ אלכן ‎oR‏
‎JV TOR‏ אלאלדק ‎LR‏
‏יערפון//. ‎Rasy‏
‏תפרף/ ת..ף א.

‎LRP‏ יא איה אלמלך ראית כאנך מתבצר פאדא בצנם ‎ORT msy‏ אלצנם
כביר לה בהגה כתירה והו קאים אמאמך ולה רועה האילה,
וע איה/ יאיהא ‎oR‏
‏פפדא/ פאדי' קית.
‎Rk may /msy‏
, . 1
דאלך/ ודלך 8 / ‎wt‏ קית.
בהגה/. ‎nana‏ ק'ת.

==== PDF page 0084 ====
11
‎pas‏ 2“
לב, דאלך אלצגם ראסה מן דהב לאלץ צדרה ודראעיה מן ‎W302 ARS‏
וחפכאדה מן נחאס,
לאלך-נתאס/ ‎Jon‏ ברובו 2.
‎LRA‏ דלך א.
ודראפיה/ רדראעאה 8.
ואפבאדה/ רפבדאה ‎oR‏
‏מן/ ‎-k fn‏
לג, סחקיה מן ‎TAIN‏ רגלאה ‎PIT‏ אגאזהא מן הדיד ובעצהא ‎WO‏ כזף.
סאקיה-כזף/ ממושמט 2.
סאקיה/ סאקאה ת.
‎LRATRAR‏ אגזאיהא א / אגזאהא ק'ת.
לד, ‎oh‏ ראות כאן חגר קד אנקטעת פצרב דאלך אלנצם עלי רגליה אלתי
מן הדיד וכזף פדקהמא פסקס,
קד/ ‎fn‏ 8.
‎/nonpir‏ אנקטע אק'ת / ב': לא ביד ‎tne‏ אק'ת.
דאלך/ דלך א.
אלנצם/ אלצנם אק'ת.
אלתו, אלדי ק'ת / נ': הי 8.
חדיד/, אלחדוד ק'ת.
וכזף/. ואלכזף ק'ת.
פדקהמא/ פדקהא ‎np‏

==== PDF page 0085 ====
12
‎‘apis‏
‏לה, חינדד אנדקו אגמעין אלהדיד ואלכזף ואלנתאס ואלפ3ם ואלדהב
וכצחרו כהשים מן בואדר אלציף ‎Oh‏ המלהם אלרית ולם ירגד להם
‎KIRK‏ אלבתה תם אן אלתגר אלדי ‎ITZ‏ אלצנם צאר גבלא רמלא גמיע
תלך אלארץ. . \ 9%
החיניד-אלארץ/ חטר רובו בתחתילתו ל.
חיניד/ חיניד3 ‎np‏
‏כהטים/ כאלהשים 8.
בואדר/ ביחדר א / בואדר ק'ת.
אלבתה/ בתה א.
גבלא/. ב': ‎may‏ 8 /8פפימח לק! / נ': עבימח 2.
לו, ואד הדא אלרויא נקול תפסירה בין ידי אלמלך ,
הדא הדה א, |
תפסירה/. תפסירהח אלק'ת.
‎fy‏ ידירו קית.
לז, וא איה אלמלך אנת מלך אלמלוך אד רב אלסמטא אלמלך ואלותאק.
| | ואלתאייד ואלכרם רזקך. | |
יא איה/ יאיהח %ל.
אלמלוך/ מלוך ‎“RB‏
‏ואלותאק/ אלותאק ל / ואלואתק (אותיות בא בכ"י ‎INR‏ למעלה
מאותיות ‎Che‏ ק .1‏ . |
ואלתתייד/, ותלתאה/ 2

==== PDF page 0086 ====
13

‘apis

לה, ‎HINT‏ יאוי גמיע אלנאס וחיואן אלצתרא וטאיד אלסמא ‎NOPD‏ אליך
וסלפך עלי גמיעהם אנת הר אלממתל ברחס אלדהב.
יפוי דאוי 2
אלצהרא/ אלבחרי קת.
אליך/ אליך (נכתב למעלה מהשורה בחאותו כ"י) 2.
וסלטך/ וצלטך ק.
גמיעהם/ גמיעהט ק.
אנת/ ‎nara‏ אלק.
אנת הר/ פאנתהו ת.

בראס/ באלראס אלת.

לט, ובעדך תקום ממלכה אכרי תדון מנך ואלםמלכה אלתאלתה תשבה
אלנחאס ותתסלט ‎VIDA TID‏ אלארץ, |
אלתאלתה/ אלג' ל,
רתתסלט/ ותתבלט קת.

מ, ואלממלכה אלראבעה תכון צלבה כלאהדיד כמא אן אלחדיד ידק
אלכל ויסחקה וירצה כדאך הי תדק אלכל רתרצה,
כלאחדיד/ כאלחדיד אתל / כלחדיד 2.
במח] רכמח אלם,
אלבל(1)/ לכל 2.
וירצה/ וירצצה 2%,
‎‘n fra‏ אלקת.

==== PDF page 0087 ====
14
פרע 2‘
מא, ואמח מא ראית מן אלקדמין ואלאצאבע ‎PIA‏ אגזתהח כוף פכאר
ובעצהא ‎TIN‏ פיכון דאלך מלכא מנקסמא פיהא מן אצל אחדיד
באיזא ‎RO‏ ראיתה ‎BIRT‏ אלכזף ואלטין, | 0
אגזאהא/ אגזאיהא אל / אגזאה ‎oP‏
‏פכאר/ מפכר אל / מפכר קת.
דאלך/ דלך א / דאר ל.
פיהא/ ופיה ‎(por‏
‏אחדיד/ אלהדיד %לק1,
באיוא/ באוא אלת. ד
רחיתה/ ראיתאה ת.
רבאלט/ ובאלט ‎p‏ / יבלט ת.
‎LAIR‏ *לכזף (חותיות אל באותו כ"י) א,
ואלטין/ אלטון א / ‎“ay poor‏ \
מב, ותאויל אלאצאבע אלתי ‎TIN RAID‏ ומנהא כזף אן יכון בעץ
אלממלכה ‎RIVE‏ ובעצהח מנכסרץח,
אלאצאבפ/ אלאצאבע ק. |
אן/ ‎oR ‘n‏ י >
‎Lin‏ יכן 2 / יר' 2. /
צלבא/ בלבהּ קת. >
מבכסרא*/ מנכסרה לת.
מג, ואמא מא ראית מן אלתלאטהמא פתאוילה ‎INST YR‏ הולאי
באלמנאסלה ולא יכתלטו באלכללה כמא ‎YR‏ אלתדיד לא ‎pond)‏
‏אלתלאמהמא/ אכתלאטהח קת.
הולצי] האולי 8 / הולא ל .
‎ind.‏ (2) / ילתזקון א,
באלכלוה/ באלכלייה קת,'
כמא] ‎fn‏ ק. 0
יכתלט/] יבאלס אל.
באלכזף/ אלכזף אל.

==== PDF page 0088 ====
15

פרע 2“

מד, וכעד מדה האתין אלממלכתין יקים רב אלסמח ממלכה לא תפסד אלר
אלדהור ולח יתרך מעהא מלכא לאמהּ אכרי פהי ‎PIN‏ גמיע הדה
אלממאלך ותסיפהא והי תתבת אלי אלדהּור,
וכעד/ ובעד אלקת.

‎ata fata |‏ ק.
רב/ אלחה ק.
אלדהור; (1) ‎J‏ אלדהר ת,

‎fanso‏ ח' ק.
תדק/ יתדק ק.
תתבת/ תתבת 12 | ך
אלדהור (2) / אלדו-ר (ה"ו" באותו כ"י) ‎oR‏

‏מה, ודלך באיזח ‎RA‏ ראית אן ‎WN‏ אנקטע מן אלגבל לא ‎THR TIA‏ פרק
אלחדיד ואלנתאם ואלכזף ראלפצה ואלדהב גמלה אלאמר ‎TR‏ אללה
אלכביר ‎FW‏ אלמלך מא יכון פי אכר אלאיאם פאלרויא ‎MANS‏
‏ותפסירהת צאדץ, /
ודלך/ ודאך 5 / דאך 2 / ודאך קת.
באיוח/ באזא אלת. |
הגר/ הגרח אלקת,.
אחד/ ‎‘n‏ פלק.
פרק/ פדק פלקת.
ואלנחאם/ ראלנתחאס אלקת.
ואלנזף/ ח' ל.
יכו יכו 2.
אלאיאם/ אלאתום א.
צחית/ צחיחה אל,
ותפסורהא/ דתפסירה אק.

==== PDF page 0089 ====
16
‎‘apis‏
‏מו, חיניד וקע אלמלך בכתנצר עלי וגהה וסגד לדניאל ואמר בחן
תקרב לה הדחיח ושמאים. |
‎fan‏ וחינד ת. |
בנתנצר/ ‎nda‏ נצר תק .
וסגד/ פסגד ‎fo‏
‏באן/ חן 2.
מז, תם קאל לה מן אלחק אלצתית אן רבכם הו אלאה אלאלאהתת וסייד
אלמלוך וכחשף אלאסראר ‎TR‏ מכנך חן תכשף הדא אלטר,
אלאה/ אלה ‎oR‏
‎LARARIRIR‏ אלאלהה ‎PR‏ / אלאלאה ת.
וסייד/ וסיד 2
אלאסראר/ חלסרחאיר קת.
מכנך/, אמכנך ת.
‎/qoan‏ כשפת קת. )
הדת] הדי ק. | .
מח, חיניל כתר אלמלך דניאל ווהב לה ‎RROD‏ נפיסה גלילה8 וסלפה
עלי גמיע מדינה באבל וומרה עלי גמיפ ‎ROIN‏ באבל,
וסלטה/ וצלסה קת.
מדינה/] מדינת ת.
מס, ‎ON‏ חן דניאל סאל אלמלך אן יולי עלי חעמל מדינה באבל שדרך
מיפך ועביד נגו ואקאם הו בבאב אלמלך,
תס-אלמלך/ מטושטש ‎TRO‏ 5.
‎frown‏ יוולד ק / נ': בה 2. \
אפמל] אצעמחל פק.
מדינה/ מדינת ‎oA‏
‏מיטך/ ‎yer‏ ת.
ועביד/ וע.,. א / ופבד ת.

==== PDF page 0090 ====
17
‎pis‏ 2“
כתבי יד: א,ק,קי,ת,גי,ג?. |
‎ph GR |‏ אן בכתנצר אלמלך אצלח צנמא ‎ant yo‏ רפעה סתין דראע ופרצה .

סתה ונצבה פי בקעה דורח פי מדינה באבל,
בלתנצר/ בת נצר קת. |
דראפ/ דרחצ* ף,
בקפה/ בקעת קת.
מדינה/ מדינת ‎“Ap‏

ב, ‎oh‏ חנה בעת ליחשד אלבטחרקה ואלאמרא ואלכלפא ואלהכאם ואלפמחל
ואלכתאב ואלשרמיין וסאיךר סלחטין אלמדן ‎FOR‏ וכר3% אלצנם אלדי.
נצבה, | |
ואלפמחל ואלכתאב/ ואלכתאב ואלעמאל ת.
סלאטין/ צלאסין ‎HP‏ \
אלמדן/ אלבלדחן אקת.
וכרה/ וכארה ‎Sane / x‏ ק.
נצבה/ נ': בכת נצר אלמלך ת.

ג, חיביל אגתמעו חלבטארקה ואלאמרא ואלכלפא ואלתכאם ואלפמאל
ואלכתחב ואלשרסיין וסאיר סלאטין אלבלדאן אלי וכרה אלצנם
אללי נצבה בנכתנצר ווקפו בין ידיה,
אגתמפו/ אגתמע א. ,
סלאמין/ צלאמין קת.
וכרה/ וכארה א / וכארת 2
בנתנצר/ ח' אפ / בכת גצר ק.

ד ואלמנאדי ינאדי בקוו3 לכם יקחל |אלשעוב] ואלאמם ‎Sant‏
‏אללגאת, :
בקווה/ ‎ipa‏ ת, |
וקחצל/ יחא מעאשר ק / נב': יא מפאשר תת.
[אלשעוב] / אלשוב א / אלשעוב קת.

==== PDF page 0091 ====
18

‘a pas

‎oA‏ פי דקת ‎YR‏ תסמעון צות אלבוק ואלצפארה ואלדך ואלטבל ואלצנג
וחלנאי וסחיר אנואע אלמלאהי תלר ותסגדו לצנם אלדהב אלדד
נצבה ב5תנצר, |
‎fi‏ תי ת.
וחלדך/ ואלדף ‎BPR‏
‏ואלנחי/ ואלינחי ‎oR‏
‏וסציר, וסאיר 8,
‎fqn‏ תכרו א / תכרו קת.
ותסגדר/ פתסגדו ת.
לבנם/ 81370 ‎R‏ / לאלצגם 5.
בכתנצר/ בכת נצר ‎JR‏ קת.

‏ו, ומן מנכם ‎RD‏ יכרד ויסגד להּ ‎JA‏ סאעתה ‎ROW‏ בה אלי ‎PINK‏ אלנאר
אלמתוקד, ן
לא] ?8 2.
ויסגד/ פיסגד א,
ירם*/ ירמי ‎Rk‏
‏אתון/ אלאתון ת.
אלמתוקד/ אלמתוקדה א / אלמתווקד קת.

‏ז, פענד ‎PRI‏ כמא כאן יסםפ גמיפ אלשעוב צות אלבוק ואלצפארת
וחלדף וחלמבל ואלצנג ואלנאי וטאיר ‎PRI‏ אלמלאהי מן וקתה
17757 גמיע חלשעוב ותאלאמם וחהל אללגחת פיסגדון 8339 אלדהב
אלדי נצבה בכתנצר אלמלך,
‎LPR‏ דלך 5.
יוטמפ/, יסמעון ת.
ותלנאי/ ח' ‎ope‏
‏אנואפ/ ‎fn‏ ת.
מן וקתה/ ח* ת.
לבנם/ ללצנם א / לאלצנם ק, |
בכתנצר/ ‎nda‏ נצר פע.

==== PDF page 0092 ====
19

‘2a pas

‎on‏ וענד דאלך ‎Jo‏ וקתה תקדם ‎DIP‏ כסאדניין פלעו ר1מזו באליהוד,
‎RT Let‏
כסתדניין/ כסדא..? א / כסדאניין ק / כשדאניין ת.
פלעו/ פסעו קת. |
פלעו וגמזו/ פמחלו *,

‏פ, באן אבתדו ‎RPT‏ לבכתנצר אלמלך אמאל אללה ‎RPL‏ אלמלך,
וקאלו/ פקאלו 5.
לבכתנצר/ לבכת נצר קת.

‏י. איה אלמלך אנת אמרת באן כל אלנטאן יסמע ‎AIS‏ חלבוק ואלצפארה
ותלדף ואלטבל ואלצנג ואלנאי וסאיר ‎PRIN‏ אלמלאהי ילר ויסגד
לצנם אלדהב.
איה/ יאיהח א / יח איה קת.
אלנסתן/ אנסחן ‎BPR‏
‏וחלנאי-*למלאהי/ ח* ‎oR‏
‏ויסגד/ פיטגד ‎oR‏
‏לצנם/ ללצנם 5.

‎oF JOT LRT‏ ילר ויסגד ירמה בה פי אתרן אלנאר אלמתקוד,
ריסגד/ פיסגד 8.
ירמה ירמי א / פירמח ק / ‎Drow‏
‏פי/ חלי ק.
אתון אלנאר/ אלאתון ת.
אלמתקוד/ אלמתוקד א / אלמתווקד קת.

==== PDF page 0093 ====
20 \
פרק גי
יב, מוגוד קום יהוד ‎WTR‏ וליתהם עלי אעמתאל מדינה באבל שדר
מישך ועבד נגו אולחיך קום לא יקבלון לאמלך אמרא מעבודך \
לא ועבדון ולאלצנם אלדהב אלדי נצבתהא לא יסגדון.
מוגוד/ פמוגוד 8.
אלדין/ אללדיג ‎eR‏
‏| שדר/ שדרך אקת.
מישך/ ומישך 5 / משך ק.
ועבד נגו/ ופבדנגו (בסוף שורה) 8.
‎a? /R?‏ 2.
יקבלון/ יקבלו קת.
לאמלך/ ללמלך א / לאלמלך קת.
מעבודך/, מעבודה ‎pr‏
‏ולאלצנם/ וללצנם א / ותלצנם ק / ולצנם ת.
נצבתהא/ נצבתה אק / נצבתאה ת,
יסגדון/ ב': לה ק.
יג, חיניד אמר בכתנצר ברגז וחמייה אן יחצר שדרך מישך ועבד בנגו
פאחצרו בין ידיה,
בלתנצר/ ‎n5a‏ נצר קת.
וחמיי3/ דחמיה 5. |
מישך/, ומישר ת.
נגו/ נג. 8.
פאהפרו/ תיניד אחצרו ק.
יד, פאבתדא וקחל להם אוקינא ית שדרך מישך ועבד נגו מעבודי ‎BID‏
‏חנתם עפאבדין ולאלצנם אללהב אללי נצבתה גיר סאגדין,
פאבתדא/ פאבתדי ‎DPR‏
‏מישך/ ומישך 8 / משר ק.
מעבודי/ למעבודי ק.
עאבדין/ עאבדון ק.
ולאלצנם/ וללצנם א / 03391 קת.

==== PDF page 0094 ====
21

פרק 2‘

מו, ואלאן 1313 מסתעדין פי וקת תסמעון צות אלבוק ואלצפארת
ואלדף ואלטבל ואלצנג ואלנתאי וסאיר אנואע אלמלאהי תנרוך
ותסגדון לאלצנם ‎WOR‏ צנעתה ‎UP TRI‏ תסגדון ‎YO‏ סאעתכם ירמא
בכם אלי אתוך אלנאר אלמתוקד ואל דא רב 993959 מן ידי.
ואלאן/ אלחן אקת.
כונו/ כנו א.
תסמעון/ תסמעו 8
צות/ חי ‎ok‏
‏לאלצנם/ 03377 5,
תסגדון/ תסגדו 8.
ירמא ירמי ת.
אלמתוקד/ אלמתווקד קת.

מז, אגאבוה וקאלו יח בכתנצר לא נהתאג ‎TR‏ נגיבך ‎WON‏ הדא בכלמה,
אגאבוה/ גחובוה ת. 0 \
בנכתנצר/ בכת נצר קת / נ': אלמלך 2.
פלי/ פן אקת.
הדא/ הדי ‎op‏

יז, אל רבנא אלדי נפבדה יסתספיע ‎YR‏ יכלצנא מן אתון אלנחר
אלמתוקד ומן ידך יח אייה אלמלך יכלצנא,
אלמתוקד/ פלמפווקד קת. \
יא אייה/ יאיהת ‎gp‏ |
אייה/ איה קת,

יה, ואן לם יכלצנא יא אייה אלמלך אנא לא נעבד מעבודך ולא ‎TABI‏
‏0139 אלדי נצבתה, |
יכלבנבא / ב': פאעלם ‎Spe‏
‏יח אויה/, יאיהח ,
אייה/ איה ‎Sp‏
‏אנא אן ק.
לצנם/ ללצבם א / נ': אלדהב א / '*: אלדהב קת.
‎/anass‏ נצבתאה ‎fo‏ : \ \

==== PDF page 0095 ====
22
‎pag‏ 2‘
ים, חיניל אמתלח בכתנצר המייף וסתנה וגהה תגיירת עלי שדרך מישך
ועבד נגו פאמר באן יסגר אלחתון סבעה עלי מא ינבגי אן יטגר,
אמתלא/ תמתלד 5.
בנתנצר/ ‎ada‏ נצר קת / נ': אלמלך ‎oR‏
‏חמייה/ ‎oman‏
‏וסחנה/ וסהנת ק / ותסנהי ת.
תגיירת/ תגידת א.
מישך/ ומישך 8 / משך 2
ופבד/ ועביד ק.
בחן/ אן א, יסגר(1)/ בגלירן: נ"א יחמת ת.
אלאתון/, נ': ללראתד א / 1'*: לאלואחד ‎Bp‏
‏ינבגי/ נ': לה קת.
כ, ואמר קומא גבתפרין מן גישה ‎YR‏ יכפתו שדרך מישך ועביד נגו
לירמי בהם פי אתוך אלנאר אלמתרקד,
יכפתו/ יכתפו ‎x‏ / יכפתון קת.
פדרך/ שד' ת. :
מישך/ ומושפך א / משך ק / ‎Sea‏ ת.
ופביד/ ועי* ת.
לירטי] ‎Bp xo?‏
אלמתוקד/ אלמתווקד קת.
כח, חיניד כפתו אולתיך אלקום בסראוי לחתהם וקמצאנהם רמשאמלהם
וסחיר לבאטהם ורמי בהם פי אתון אלנאר אלמתוקד,
כפתו/ כתף א / כתפו 2
בסראוי לאתהם/ בסראוילתהם ‎R‏ / בסראוילאתהם ק / בסראוילהם 2.
פי/ ב': וסט ‎ap‏ |
פי חתון/ אלי וסט 5.
אתון/ ח' ונשלם למעלה מהשורה ובגליון ת.
אלמתוקד אלמתווקד ק. ן

==== PDF page 0096 ====
23
‎‘as‏
‏כב, ‎RODS‏ כאן אלאמר האתא ואלאתון סגר ‎RISA‏ חולאיך אלדי זגו
בשדרך מישך ועביד נגו קתלהם והג אלנאר,
תלאמר/ ‎WR‏ אלמלך 5.
חאולעיך/ אלקום ‎BPR‏
‏אלדי/ אללדין ‎DR / RB‏ קת.
זגו/ גאזו ק.
בפדרךר, בט' ת.
מישך/ ומישך ‎Rk‏ / מיש' ת.
רעביד/ ‎fant‏ ת.
והג/ והב ק.
כג, ואולאיך אלנפר אלתלאתה שדרך מישך ועבד נגר וקער פי ‎BUT‏
‏אתון אלנאר אלמתוקד מכפותין,
ואולתיך/ ח' ‎APR‏
‏*לנפר/ ואלנפר אקת.
אלתלאתה/ אלג' ‎spina)‏ אלתלתה) ת,
פדרך/. ‎Ste‏ ת.
מיסך/ ומישך ‎x‏ / משך ק / ‎Soa‏ ת.
ועבד/ ופביד ע / ופ* ‎of‏
‏וקפו/ פוקפו ‎2B‏
‏וסס/ וצט ע.
אלמתוקד/ אלמתווקד קת.
מכפותין/ ‎Pans‏ 8.

==== PDF page 0097 ====
24
‎pas‏ גי
כד, היביד קלק ב5תנצר אלמלך וקאם מבאדרא פאבתדת רקאל לקוחדה
אליס תלאתה נפר רמינח בהם אלי וספ אלנחר מכפותין *גאבוה
וקאלוד יקינא יא חייה *למלך, .
היניל-תלאת8/ חסר ג?.
בבתנצר/ ‎nda‏ נצר קת.
פאבתדא/ פאבתדי אחת.
תלחתה/ ג' ת.
‎asf} £193‏ ג?.
חלו/ פו ת.
רסט/ וצט 2
אלנחר/ אלנ-[] ג?. |
מכפותין/ מכתפין 5 / ] ]תפין ג?.
אגחבוה/ אגאבר ג.
‎tn fe‏ ג"ת.
יח אייה/ יחיהת ת.
אייה/ איה ג?קת.
כה, אחגאבהם וקאל הודח אנצר חרבעה נפר מהללין יתמשון פי ‎HoT‏
‏אלנאר וליס פיהם שי מן אלפסאד וחלייה אלראבע תשבה אלמלאיכה,
אגעבהם-נפר/ חסר ג?.
הוד*ת/ התנא א / הודי 2.
אגבר/ נאסר .
ארבעה/ 61 ‎x‏
‏מחללין/ ,תלליך ‎7a‏
‏וסס/ ‎esi‏ ק.
וליט/ מטרשמט ג?.
שי/ ‎Re‏ את / סטיי" ק. |
ותחלייה/ וחליה 8ג? / וחלית 2.

==== PDF page 0098 ====
25
פרק ‎‘a‏
‏כו, חיניל תקדם בכתנצר ‎WR‏ באב ‎JINR‏ אלנאר אלמתוקד פנאדח יע
שדרך מישך ועבד נגו ‎TAY‏ אלאלחה אלעאליי אכרגו ותעחלו ‎FIN‏
‏פדרך מישך ופבד נגו כרגו מן וסט אלנאר,
חיניך/. חסר ג?.
בלתנצר/ בכת נצר ג? / ‎asa nda‏ ק'ת.
אלנאר, אל זר גל.
תלמתוקד/ ‎‘n‏ ג?ק'ת.
פנאדח/ פנאדי א.
פדרך/ שד* פ'ת.
מישך/, ומישך א / מיש* ל'ת.
ועבד], ‎Savi‏ ית / ‎‘m3‏ ג?.
פבד/ פביד אג?ק'ת.
אלאלאה/ אללה ‎Zar‏
‏אלצאליי/ *לצלי 5 / אלפחלי ג?ק'ת.
‎Warn‏ )2( / נ': כרג 8.
שדרך (2)-מן/ חסר ג?.
שדרך (2)/ ‎np ‘te‏
מישך (2)/ ומישך א / מיש' ק'ת.
ועבד )2(/ ועב' קית
ועבד ‎Jaa‏ (2)/ ועבדנגו (בסוף שורה) 8.
5רגו/ ‎ok fn‏
וסט ובס ק'ת.

==== PDF page 0099 ====
26
‎pas‏ גי
כז, ואגתמעו אלבטחרקה ואלאמרא ואלכלפח וקואד אלמלך 17337 אולאיך
אלקום ותעגבו כיף לם יתסלט אלנאר עלי אגסאמהם ‎WHI‏ רוסהם
לם יתשווט ולבאסהם לם יתגיר וראיתה אלדכאן לם ‎payn‏ בהם,
ועגתמעו], ראגתמע פק'ת / וא---]- ג?. | \
ינצרו/ פנפרו א / פנפרו ק'ת ‎wb  /‏ (חסר ומטוטטפ) ג? /
ב': אלי ג?. \ .
אחולאיך/ אוליך ‎Zar‏
‏ותעגבו/ ‎7a aon‏ \
לם )1( / לח קית. .
יתסלט/ תתסלס ג? / יתבלט ת.
פלי] פי ג?. 0/9
אגסאמהם/ אגסאמהם ג?.
רוסהם/ רווסהם 8.
יתפווט/ יתשום אג?ק'ת.
יתגיר/. יתגייר ק'ת.
אלדכאן/ דכאן ‎oR‏
‎fon‏ חסר ‎7a‏

==== PDF page 0100 ====
27

“2 ps

כח, תם אבתרא בכתנצר וקאל תבארך אלאה שדרך מישך ופביד נגו ‎S79R‏
‏בעת במלכה ונכלץ עבידה ‎PTR‏ תוכלו ‎AION‏ וגיירו אמר אלמלך) ,
ובדלו אגסאםהם דון חן יעבדון ואן יסגדון לאללה ‎RID‏ אלאההם,
אבתרא/, אבתדי א / אבתדת ‎nip‏ / קאל ג?.
בכתנבר/ בכת נצר ק'ת.
וקאל/ פקאל 8. .
תבארך/ תברך א / ‎Taran‏ ג?.
אלאה/ ‎AIR‏ א / ‎wey‏ ג?.
שדרך/ ש* 21 / ‎np ‘to‏ :
מיסך/ ‎to‏ ג? / ומיסך 8 / מיש' ק'ת.
ועביד, וע* 21 / ‎Sani‏ קית )7 בשומר הדף: ועבד), ‏ |
במלבה/ מלכה ג?. |
‎{IR‏ אללדין א / אלדי ק'ת.
תוכלו/ תוכלך ג?. ‏ .
‎Zi‏ רגירו ‎Zar‏ .
אלמלך/ אל . ] ג.
יעבדון/, יעבדו 5 / יפ[ ] ג?.
וצן/ אר ‎npr‏ | \
ואן יסגדוו, [ ]ה ‎ar [ jean‏
יסגדון/ ‎Wav‏ 8. \ 0
לאללה/ לאלה 8 / לאלאה פיב / ולה ‎27a‏
‏סוא/ סוי א. |
אלאההם/. אלההם אג?.

==== PDF page 0101 ====
28

‘2 pas

כט, והודח אמר ‎WRI‏ אן יכון אי קביל או אמה יתקוול אלמחאל 899
אלאה שדרך מישך ועבד נגו חן יגעל אעצאא ומנזלה נכאלא א% לח
ירגד אלאה אלר יסתמיע אן וכלץ כצאלך,
והודא-נכאלא/ חסר ‎wa‏
‏והודא, ואנא ג?.
או יכון/ ח* ג?.
אמה/ ‎sta‏ או דר לגה 8 / נ': או דר לגה ק'ת / ג': או לסאן ג?.
יתקוול/, יתקול ‎aR‏ .
אלאה (1)/ אלה 5 / אללה ג?.
שדרך-1גו/, שך,.] די ‎27a‏
‏שדרך/. שד* ‎np‏
‏מישטך/ ומישך 8 / ‎‘wa‏ ק'ת.
ועבד/, ‎‘ami‏ ק'ת.
אן (2)/ ח* ק'ת. .
יגפעל/ מסוטטש וחסר גו . .
‎geboR /erdoe‏ ה- הט

| ומנזלה-כדאלך, ‎ok Sn‏
ומנזלה/, ומנזלה ג?.
‎/R? |‏ לם ג?. \
‎anor‏ (2)/ נ': אן ג'.

בופלך]) כדלך ג'ג?.

ל, ‎OH‏ אן אלמלך אצלת תחאל שדרך מישך ועביד נגו פי מדינה באבל,
חאל ‎Jn‏ ] ג?. בש \
שדרך-נגו/ [ ‎‘of‏ 17 [ (הסר ומפושסט) ג?.
שדרך/. שד' ק'ת. /
מיסך/. ומיפך ג' / ‎Sava‏ ק'ת.
ועביד/, ועבד ‎fava / ta‏ ק! / וע' ת, ‏
פי-באבל/. חסר ומפושסט ג?. \
מדינה/ מדינת ת.

==== PDF page 0102 ====
29

‘2 pas

ל*, ‎oh‏ אן בלתנצר ‎and‏ אלי גמיע אלשעוב ואלאמם ודרי אללגאת
אלמקימין פ* גמיע אלבלאד סלאם עליכם וברכאת ‎SHIR‏ |
תם אן בכתנצר/ פאול אל נסכה נבוכדנצר אלמלך ג'. |
בנתנצר/ נבוכדנצר אלמלך ‎fox‏ בכת/נצר ת / נ': אלמלך ‎np‏
‏ואלאמם/ ואלארמם ג'.
ודוי/ ודרר ‎yg‏
‏אללגאת/ אלגאת ג'.
אלבלאד/ אלבלדתן ק'ת.
סלאם/ סלם ‎ar‏ . \
עליכם וברכאת אללה/ אללה עליכם וברכאתה ק'ת.
וברכאת/ וברכה ג!.

לב, אלאיאת ואלאפגובאת אלתי צנעהא מעי אלאלאה אלפאלי ראית אך
אכברכם בהא, \
אלאיאת/ אתנא אלאיאת ג'. .
ואלאעגובאת/ ותלאפגובא"ת א / ואל עגובאת ג'.
אלתי/ ‎vor‏ ק'ת. .
אלאלאה], אללה אג'קית.
אלעאלי/ אלעלי ת.

לג, ‎ANRIR‏ פמא אעצמהא ואעגובאתה ‎ROS‏ אשדהא מלכה מלך אלעאלם
וסלסאנה פי כל גיל ואגיאל.. \
איאתה/., ראש הפסוק מסושמש ת. |

\ אעבמהא/ אעממהא ‎‘a‏ / אכתרהא ק'ת.

וסלטחנה/ ובלטאנה 2.

==== PDF page 0103 ====
30
בתבי יד: ‎'p,p,R‏ ,13,8
‎LR‏ אנא בכתנצר כנת סאליא ומטמאנא פו היבלי, |
בנתנצר/ בכת/נצר ק' / ב5ת נצר ת.
סתליא/ סאילא ג1 / נ'ו פי מנזלי אק'תג'.
רמטמאנא/ רמסאמאנא ת.
ב, חתי רחית רויא פאפועני ואפכארי עלי מצגעי ורויא" ידפרני,
רויחפ/ חלמא אק'תג!..
ורויאי/ ורויאיי אגי.
ג, פאמרת פאה%ר אליי גמיע הכמח באבל ליערפוני תפסיר דאלך.
פאחבר/ פאה3אר ק'ת. .
אליו/ אלי א / ‎tn‏ ג'.
באבל/ בבל ג'.
דאלך/דלך אג'.
ד, תיניד חצרו אלחכמא ואלמנגמין ואלכסדאניין ואלתכאם פקצצת
‎IIIT‏ אלרויא ולם יערפוני תאוילהח,
חצרר/ חצר אג'. \
ואלכסדאניין, ואלכסדחגין ג'.
ואלחכאם-תאוילהא/] מסרשטש 5.
פקצצת, ‎Wz Ransyps‏

==== PDF page 0104 ====
31

‎pas‏ בי

‏ה, ואלי חצר בין ידיי אכדהם [דנ יאל] אלדי אסמיתה בְלטשאצר כאטם
מעבודי ולאן פיה רוח אללה אלמקדס פקצצתהת עליה,
ואלי/ אלי ‎lan‏ / ב': אן אג'ק'ם.
‎Lan‏ אג'. \
אלדהם]. אכרהם קית. ;
[דביאל]/ דניתל אג'ק'ת.
אסמיתה/ ‎wap moor‏ \
בלטשאבר/ בלטשצר אג'ת / בלט 730 ‎.'p‏

‏כאסם// בחסס אג'ק'ת.
ולאן/, ואלאן ג'. \
אלמקדט/ נ': פיה ג'.

‏4 וקלת לה וא בלטשאצר רייס אלתכמא ‎STOR‏ אעלם מנך אן רות אללה
אלמקדס ‎WS‏ וכל סר ‎WITT ROS‏ ואלדי קאל לד אנפא אלרויאי
ותפסירהת..
‎fay‏ ח* ‎wa‏ .
בלמטאבר, בלסטצר אג'ת / 072 שבר ק'.
רייס/ ריס ‎ok‏ \
אן/ נ': פיך ‎np.‏
‎aig ‘n fs‏
סר/ סיר ‎eta‏ :
‎L139‏ יעויך 8 / יעזך ג'. \
אלרויעאי/ רוואיי 2 / רויאי ג! / אלרוית ק'ת.

‏ז, רויאי אלאן עלו מצגעי ראית כאן שגרה פי ‎VOI‏ אלארץ ‎inayat]‏
‎[pr 39‏
רויאי/ רויתיי 8,/ רואי ג'.
פלו/ עלו אג'ק'ת. /
כאן שגרה/, מסושטט ‎Ro‏
‏וסט/] רבם ‎np‏ \
אלארץ/. ארץ 5 / אל ארץ ג'.
[ורפעהא ‎f [oss‏ ה ‎‘a‏ / ואסעה רפ... ‎WAS‏ א / ואסעה רפעהא

‏כתיר פ'ת.

==== PDF page 0105 ====
ב
\ 32
‎pag‏ ב'
ח,. ואן תלך אלשגרה ‎nang‏ וע%מת רפעהת ‎JIT WOR‏ אלסמא ושפבהא אלד
‎RIPR‏ גמיע ‎JON‏ אלארץ. ,
ואן תלך אלשגר3]. חתי אג'ק'ת.
כתרת/, כברת אג'ק'ת.
ועצמת// פעממת אג' / מפמת ת / ג': ובלג א / נ': ובלג ק'ת /
ב': ובלגת.ג!.
‎Lan‏ דוין אק'ת..
אקצת/ ח* אפג'קית.
₪, ואגצתנה* חסאן ותמרהא ‎WHI‏ וקות לאלכל פיה ותחתהא יסתצל
חיואך אלצהרא ‎WIT‏ אגצאנהא יאוי ‎TRO‏ אלסמא ומנהא ימאן כל
בשרי. \
\ לאלבל]. 9999 א / ללבול ג!.
פיה/ ח' ג' / פיהח ‎np‏ 2
ותחתהאק/, די רוח תתתהח ‎a‏ .
יסתבל/, יסתטל א / ויסתלל ג'.
‎sq faa‏ ג'. \
| בשרי/ נ': הנאך ק'ת /8ה ך 8 / ג': |צאך הנאך ג1.
י, תם ראית תמאם רויאי פי אלליל באן ‎TWO‏ קדוס ‎JO‏ אלסמא קד נזל,
רויצי/ רואיי ‎ty‏ / אלרויאי ק'ת.
אללול-גזל, חסר ג'.
באן/ כאן ל'ת.

==== PDF page 0106 ====
33
‎pig‏ 1‘
וע, ינאדי בקווה והכדא יקול ‎Wa‏ אלשגרה וקצו תאגפאנהא ואכברפר |
ורקהא ובדרו תמרהא יזול אלותפ ‎Jo‏ תתתהא ואלטיר ‎YO‏ אגצאנהח,
וקצו/. וקצצו ‎np‏ 0/0
אגבאנהא/ אגצאנהח ק'ת.
ואלסיר, ואלסאיר ק'ת.
יב, לא סנך אצולהא אתרכוה פי אלארץ ושדוה בותאק מן אלחדיד
ואלנהאס פי כלחי ‎RANBIR‏ ומן ‎RTI‏ אלסמא ינצבג וקותה מע
אלבהאים מן עשב אלצחרא,
לא] 137 ‎nip‏
‏אלחדיד/ חדיד ‎nip‏
‏ואלנחאס/ ונחאס ק'ת.
בלאי/ בלא קית.
אלצחרא/. אלצחרי ת / אלצהראן ב / אל/צהרח ק!.
יג, ותמייזה יגייר ‎YO‏ תחאל אלנאס ותכייל אלבהאים יגעל לה וסבעט
אחואל תמצי עליה כדאך,
‎may :‏ יגיר פי.
ותכייל/ ותביל ‎op‏
‏כלאך) בדאלך ק'ת.

==== PDF page 0107 ====
34

‘a pag

יד, וכאן אלקול בתתם אלמלאיכה וגואב אלמסאלה בקול אלקדוטין 997
יעלם אלבאט ‎YR‏ אלעלי מסלט ‎IVY‏ מלכהם ומן ישא ינצבה להם ויגוד
ח*אן ינצב להם אלוציע מנהם,
אלפלי] אלפאלי ק!.
מלכהם/ מלך אלנאס ק!' / אלנאס ת.
ומן/ למן בער
יסא] שא אעמאה רמן שא קית.
להם )2( ‎f‏ לה ק! ת.

פו, הכדא אלרוית ‎HIRI‏ אנא בכתנצר אלמלך ואנת יא בלטשאצר תפסירהא
קל לאגל אן גמיע הכמא ממלכתי ‎oF‏ יסתטיעו תפקירהא לתערפוני
ואנת תסתטפיע לאן מוגוד ‎WS‏ רות אללה אלמקדס,

| הכדא-אנא/ חסר ‎"re‏ : |
בכתנצר אלמלך/ אלמלך ‎nda‏ נצר ק'ת.
אלמלך/ ת' ‎wk‏ , ב
בלמטאצר, בלסשבר א / בלס שצר ק'ת.
תפסירהא קל, ערפנ" תפסירה 2.
קל יקאל ת.
לאגל-לתפרפוני/ אד ליס פי ‎RAIN‏ ממלכתי מן יקדר אן יערפנו
תפסירה 2. .

אן גמיע/ ‎wap ‘n‏ .
לתצרפוני/ לתעריפי ק'ת.
תסתמיע/ תערפה 5. .
מוגוד-אלמקדס/ פיך עלמא ‎Jo‏ אלקדוסין 8.

==== PDF page 0108 ====
35
‎pas‏ ב'
‎TO‏ חיניד ‎prox‏ דניאל אלמסמא בלטשאצר ‎NI‏ סאעה וכאדת אפכארה ‎VR‏
‏תדהשה ‎ANN‏ אבתדא אלמלך וקאל יא בלסשאצר לא יהולך אלרויח* ‏ ©
ותפסירהא אגאבה פקחל יא סיידי אלרויא לשאניך ותפסירהא לעדווך,
אלמסמא/ אלמסמי ת, / |
בלטטחצר (1)/ בלטשצר א / בלט שצר ק'ת.
וכאדת/ ואכדת 8.
אן/ ‎‘n‏ א.
אבתדא/ אבתדי אק'ת. /
וקאל/ פקאל א / נ': לה א,. \
בלטשאצר (2)/. בלטשצר א / בלס שצר קית.
יהולך]/, יהולך 5. .
ותפטירהא/., רתארילהא את.
אגאבה/, פאגאבה 8.
פקאל/ וקאל אתק.
סויידי, סידי א, .
לעדווך/ לפדוך 5.
יז, תאויל אלשגרה אלתי ראיתהא קד כברת ועצמת ובלג ארתפאעהא ‎VIR‏
‏דון אלסמא ושעבהא ‎WR‏ אקצא תלך אלארץ,
אלתי/ אלדי ת. .
ועבמת/] ופסמת ת,
ועפמת-אלסמא/ ממושמש מאוד 2.
ארתפאעהא/, א פאפהת 8.
אלי (1)/ ח' אקת.
דון/ ‎at‏ את. | .
ושעבהא/ ועשבהח ץ,
אלי (2)/ חי ‎ok‏ \
אקצא/, אקבי 8 / אקאבי ק.
אלארץ/ אלארךץ אקת.

==== PDF page 0109 ====
36
‎pas‏ די
וח, ואגצאנהא חסאן ותמרהא כתיר וקות אלכל מנהא ותתתהא יאוי וחש
אלצחרא ופי אגצאנהא יסכן מאיר אלסמת,
מנהת/ מנה א. . |
אלצחרא/] אלצחרי קת.
ים, אנת הר יא ‎ATR‏ אלמלך אלדי כברת ועכָמת ועלת ריאסתך פדאנת
אלסמא ובלג סלטאנך ‎JOR‏ אקטאר אלארץ.
‎fia‏ חי ת. .
יא איוה/ יא יהח 8,
אייה/ איה קת. .
‎-R[ pots {naam‏
סלטאנך/ צלטאנך קת.
כ ואמא מא ראי אלמלך מלך קדוס נזל ‎Jo‏ אלסמא פקאל גדו ‎Frag‏
‏ואקטעוהא לכן טנך אצולהא אתרכו פי אלארץ מותוקא בחדיד
ונחאס פי ללא אלצהרא ‎RTI YOY‏ אלסמא ינצבג קָקותה מע אלבהאים
מן עשב אלצחרא] אלי ‎WAH YR‏ עליה סבעה אחהואל,
מלך/ ‎R320‏ .
קדוס/ קדיסא א / קדוסא קת.
בזל/ על ת.
אצולהא, אצלהא 2..
אתרכו/, אתרכוה את.
מותוקא/ מותרקה ת.
אלצחרא/ אלצהרי ע. \
[ומן-ינבבג/, ומן ‎RTI‏ אלססא ינצבג א / ‎JO‏ נדא אלסמא ינצבג ק2. | .
הקותה-אלצהרא]/ ומע ותש אלצתרא קותה 8 / ומע ותש אלצתרי קותה קת.
סבפה/ ז' אק.

==== PDF page 0110 ====
37
‎‘i pag‏
כא, פהדא תאוילה יח אייה אלמלך והו חכם אלעלי אלדי חכם ‎WIN‏ סיודו
אלמלך,
פהדא/ ‎vine‏ ע.
יא אייה/ יא דה" ‎ok‏
‏אייה/ איה קת. .
אלפלי/ תלעליר א / אלצחלי קת.
אלדר/ ‎fa‏ קד 8. |
‎fp. ann /)2( aan‏
‎(Mp‏ סידי ‎Rk‏
‏כב, באן תנפא מן בין אלנאס ורתאורי מע ‎ONT‏ אלצתרא ותגתדי אלצשב
כאלבקר ותנצבג מן טל אלסמא ותמ3" עליך סבעה אהואל ‎FAN‏ תעלם
חן אלעאלי מסלט ‎39D‏ מלך אלנאט ‎JO?‏ שא אצטאה,
תנפא/ ינפי ‎R‏ / ינפח ק.
ותחאוי/ ריחוי ‎a‏
‏אלצהרא-חתי/, מסושטש ‎ONT‏ ת.
אלצהרא/ אלצחרי קת.
ותגתדי/ פיגתדי 2,
ותנצבג/ וינצבג ע.
ותמבי/ ודמצי ת.
פליך] פליה ק.
אחואל/ נ': כדאך א / ג': כדאך קת.
אלפאל"/ אלעלו 5 / אלצתל ת.
מסלם] מצלט קת.
אפטאה/] יעטיה אק.

==== PDF page 0111 ====
38
‎pas‏ די
כג, ראמא מא קאל מן תרך סנר אצול אלשגרהּ פתאוילהא אן 7370 סיעוד ‏
‎THA WIR‏ אן תעתרף בסלטאן ‎ANKE‏ אלסמח,
קאל/ קאלר אקת. \
אצול, אבל 2.
פתאוילהא/ פתאוולה אק. \
בסלטאן/ בצלמאן קת.
כד, לכן וא ‎WIR AIK‏ תהסן משורתי ‎Way‏ פתפך כטייך בצדקה
ודנובך בראפה אלצעפא פלעל אן תכון ‎AoA‏ לנעמתר.
לכן/ ולכן אק. \ : :
יח תייה/ יח דהח ת.
אווה/ איה קת.
‎fn f/yonn‏ ב.
כטייך/ כפיתך א / כטייתך קת.
בצדקה/ באלצדקה 2. יי ,
אלצעפא] אלבעפי אקת.
‎fords‏ לצפל ת,
מהלה/ מוהלה ע,
לנעמתך/ נ'ז פי דלך ת.
‎LAD‏ אלכל הל בבכתנצר אלמלך.
אלכל-אלמלך/ מטושמש וחסר א,
בבכתנצר/, פי בכת נצר ק / בבכת נצר ת.

==== PDF page 0112 ====
39
ברע ד'
כו, בעד אתנ* עשר פהרא ‎TRI‏ יתמשא עלד היכל ‎POR‏ 39 באבל,
אתבי/ ‎Rane‏ ע.
אתני פשר/ אתנאעטר ת.
היכל] היבל אקת.
כז, פאבתדא וקאל אן הדא באבל כברי אלתי בניתהא לד למנבד אלמלך
בשדה ותאקי ובהאי,
פאבתדא/ פאבתדי אקת.
וקאל/ ב': אלא ‎oR‏
‏הדח/ ‎ata‏ א / ‎ata‏ קתב.
כברי/ אלכברי אקת.
לי ח' אקת.
למנבר/ מנבר 5.
ותאקי/ ותאק א / ג': לכרמי א / נ': וכרמי עת.
ובהאי/ ובהאיי חק.
כח, בין מא אלכלמה פי פמה אד וקע צות מן ‎RODIR‏ לך יקאל וח
בכתנצר אלמלך אלמלך קד זאל ענך.
בין ‎fro‏ ביבא א / בינאה 2.
פמה/ פיה א / פאה ע.
אד/ חתי אקת.
דקפ ורד אקת.
בנתנצר/ בכת נצר קת.
אלמלך (2)/ ח'* 8.
דחל/ ב': אלמלך ‎oR‏

==== PDF page 0113 ====
40
‎pas‏ די \
כט, ומן בין אלנאס תנפא ומע ותש אלצתרא תאוי פתגתדי אלעשב
כאלבקר ותמצי עליך סבעה חתואל ‎Wn‏ תערף חן אלפאלד מסלט
עלי מלך אלנאס למן שא אעפאהח,
תבפא/ תבפי אק.
אלצחרא/ אלצחרי קת.
אלעטשב/ נ': תנפא ת.
סבפה] ז' ‎«PR‏
‏אהואל/ נ': כדאך א / נ': כלאך ת / נ': בצחך ק.
חחי/ ‎wun‏ את / ‎in‏
‏תערף/ תעתרף א / תעלם קת.
אן/ באן את. |
אלצאלו/ אלצלי 5,
מסלט/ מבלט קת.
אפמתהץ] יעטיה אק / אפטחאה ם.
,
ל, מן סאעתה חל אלאמר בבכתנצר ומן בין אלנאס נפי וצאר יאכל
פשב כאלבקר ואנצבג מן ‎RTI‏ אלסמא אל* אן ‎WD‏ פערה שביה
בריש אלנסור ואצפארה כאלגוארח.
מן/ רמו 2.
סאפתה/ סאפה קת.
‎fon‏ הל ק.
\ בבכתנצר/ ‎nan‏ נצר קת.
| יאבל] יתבל 2.
פסב/ אלפטב קת.
ואנצבג. 333997 א / וינצבג קת / ונגצבה ב.
כבר] בבר 2«
אלנסור/ אלנסר ‎oR‏
‏ואבפארה/. ואטמפארה א,

==== PDF page 0114 ====
41
‎pag‏ די
לא, פלמא אנקצת תלך אלאיאם רפעת עיני* תנא בכתנצר אלו אלסמת
ורגעת ‎wy‏ עקל* פהמדת ‎PRIOR‏ וסבחת ומגדת אלעאלם ‎ATOR‏
‏סלפאנה סלטאן אלפאלם ומלכה מע גיל וגול,
אנקבת/ ‎nan‏ ת.
עיביי/ פיבי את.
בנתנבר/ בכת נצר קת.
‎Javan‏ פרגע א / ‎van‏ קת.
פלי/ אליי א / צפלוי קת.
פהמדת/ 8,..ת 2
אלעאלו/] אלעליי ‎oR‏
‏אלפאלי וסבחת/ ח' ת.
ומגדת/ נ': חי אק / נ': חיי ם,
סלטאנה/ צלמאנה ק.
סלסאן/ צלטחן ק,
מפ] אלו ‎oR‏
‏גיל גיאל 2.
וגיל/ ואגיחל ‎BPR‏
‏לב, וגמיע אחל אלארץ לא כשי מחסובין והו מראדה יצנעה בגיש
אלסמא ואהל אלארץ רליס מן יברב עלד ודה ולא יקול לה מא
דא צבעת.
וגמיע-ואהל,/. חסר ג'.
אחל/. אהל אקת.
בגיט/ כגיט ק'ת.
‎fq‏ 30 ג'.
‎fro‏ ב': מן א.
‎tan fn Let‏

==== PDF page 0115 ====
42
‎pag‏ די
לג, פי דלך אלוקת ‎WIR TRY‏ פקלי ווקאר מלכי ובהגתי רבהאף
תראגע אליו 197 אלוקאר ואלרוסח ‎IOI‏ ותבחת ‎IS‏ 3590
וזיד לי שרף כתיך,
דלך-אלוקאר/, מטושטש לגמרי א,
ובהאי/ ובהאיי ג'.
תראגע/ תרגע ג'.
אליי (2)/ לי ג'.
אלוקאר/ אלקואר ק'ת.
ואלרוסא/, ואל ריסח ג' / ואלרויסא ק'ת.
ותבחת/ ותתבת 8 / ותבתת קית / ותבת ג'.
פי (2)/ ת' ‎o£‏
‏לד, אלאן אנא בכתנצר מסבתח ומרפע ומבגל ‎YAP‏ אלסמא אלדי גמיע
צנעה אלחק וסבילה אלחכם ומן יסיר בין ידי באקתדחרא יקדר
אן יחטה,
בנתנצר/ בכת נצר ת / בכת/נצר ק'.
גסיפ/ גמע 25.
וסבילה/. וסבלה אג'ק'ת.
ידי/ ידוה אג'ק'ת.
באקתדארא/ באקתדאר אג'ק'ת / נ': הר ג'.
יקדר/. קארר ג'.
יחפה/ ‎on sta‏ אל גד אל ‎$a‏ ג'.

==== PDF page 0116 ====
43

“2 pas

כתב%ף יד: א,ק,קי,ת,ג',

א,. ‎ON‏ אן בלפאצר אלמלך אצלה טעחמח כתירא לאלף ראיס ‎AVG‏ וגלס
הדאעהם שארבא כמרח,
בלשאבר), בלפצר אג'ק'.
רחיס/ ריט אג! / רייס ק'ת / ריחס ב.
שארבא/ דשרב א / ישרב ג'ק'ת.
5מר*]) אלכמר אג'.

ב, פלמא מלכה רח* אלכמר ‎WR‏ אן ‎Tenn‏ אנייה אלדהב ואלפצה ‎anor‏
‏אכרגהח בכתנצר אביה מן אלהיכל אלדד פי מדונה לישרב בהא אלמלך
וחלרוסא ותרחריה וסראריה,
אנייה/ אניה ‎fn / Tote‏ ת.
אלתי/ אלדו ‎aR‏ .
אכרגהא/ אבדהח ק'ת.
בכתנצר// ‎nda‏ נצר ק'ת.
אביה/ אבוה ג1.
אלהובל]) היכל ג'.
מדינה/, מדינת לית / ב'ו אלסלם 5 / 263 אל סלאם ג1 / ג': אלסלאם ‎cn'p‏
‏לישרב/ ולישרב אג'ק'ת.
ואעלרוסא/ ואלרוסא א / וחעלריסח ג! / וחלרווסת 2 / וחל/רויסא ק';
וחראריה/ ‎Ravin‏
‏דסראריה/, רטראירה ‎oR‏

==== PDF page 0117 ====
44
ג, חיניד אהצרת אנייה אלדהב ואלפצה אלתי אכרגוה מן היכל בית
אללה אלדד פי ירושלם וטפק ‎TR‏ ישרב בהא אלמלך ואלרוסא
הדאריה וסראריה,
אחברת/. אהברה ק'ם.
אנייה/ ‎avian‏ אג'ק' ת(בשפומר הדף: אנות) / נ': בית אללה ‎cla‏
‏ואלפצה/. ח' אק'ת.
אלתי/ חלדי ‎lag‏ / אלדי ק'ת.
אכרגוה/. אכרגוה* ‎tar‏ / אכרגוה"ח ק'ת.
בית/ ח* ג'. \
אלדו, אלתי ק'ת.
ירושלם/ דאר אלסלם א / ירושלים ת.
' רספק/ וטאק (נמחק בקו ונכתב על גביו באותו כתב היד: וטלב) ג'.
וחלרוסא/ וחאלריסח ‎tan‏ / ואלרויסא ק'ת.
חראריה/, וחראירה את / וחראריה ג'ק!.
וסראריה/ וסרחירה ת.
ד אכדו אן ישרבו בהא ‎RIS‏ וסבחו לאלאהה ‎AIR‏ ראלדהב ואלנתאס
ואלחדיד ואלכשב ואלתגארה,
בהא/ ‎fn‏ אם.
לאלאה3/. לאלאה ג1 / ‎anor?‏ אק'ת.
אלפ33 ואלדהב// חלדהב ואלפצה ‎anton / Tye‏ ואלפבה ק'ת.
וחלחגארה/, ואלחגר אג'.

==== PDF page 0118 ====
45
‎‘a pag‏
ה, מן סאעתה ‎NASM‏ אצאבע בצורה יד אלאנסחן פכתבת בהדא אלמבארה
פעפלי חספידחג חאיט אלמלך ואלמלך ירא אלכף והי תכתב, \
חצרת/ פהרת ‎eta wins / x‏
אצאבפ/ אלאצאבצע פ'ת.
בצורה/ בצורת ק'ת.
יד אלאנסאן/, יד אן/*נסאן ג'.
אלאנסאן/ ,.אנסחאן 2 / אנסתן ק'ת.
עלי/ ‎nlp roy‏
‎LARTV GOR‏ אספאדתג א / אסבידג ‎1a‏ / אספודאג ק'.
‎Loren‏ 383 היכל תק'ת.
ירא/, ירי 5 / ינבר ק'ת.
ו, חיניד תגיירת סתנתה ואדערתה אפכחארה וכאן כרז צלבה תתללת
ואקבלת רכבאתה תנצך ואהדה מע אלאכרי,
תגיירת/ תגירת ‎wlan‏
‏ואדערתה/ ואדרעתה 5,
אפכארה/ אפכאהה ‎ola‏
‏וכאו/ וכ (כך הוח בכ"י) ג1.
רכבאתה// רכבתאה אקת.
תנצך/. תצטך אג'.
וחחדה/. אל/ואתדה ‎ta‏ / ואחד ת.
אלחכרו/ אכרי א,

==== PDF page 0119 ====
46

“a ‏פרק‎

‎Tt‏ פנאדא בקווה באחהצאר אלמנגמין ואלכסדאניין ואלחכאם פאבתדצ
וקאל להם אי אנסאן אחסן אן יקרא הדא אלכתאב ווערפני
תפסירהא ילבס אלחמרה ויפודק בטוק אלדהב 997 תלת אלממלכה,
‎/RTRIS‏ פנאדי אג'.
בקווה/ בקוה ‎aR‏
‏ואלכסדאניין// ואלכסדאנין ג1.
ואלתכאם/, נ': ואלכתחב ‎eB‏
‏פאבתדא, פאבתדי ‎pr‏ / פאבדת ג'.
אחסן/ ‎qon‏ צגי. \
הדא הדי ק.
תפסירהחא/ תפסידה אג'קת.
ילבס/ ‎vax‏ אקת / פילבס ג'.
ויטווק/ ורטוק אג'ת.
בטוק/ ‎oR pupa‏
וילי] וירלי 5,
תלת/ תלה א.

‏ח, היניד הצר גמיע הכמא באבל פלם יטיקו יקרו אלכתאב 739 על+
‎1R‏ יערפו אלמלך תפסירה,
חינוד-באבל//, ח' (והשאר נכתב כהמשכו של פסוק הקודם) ג1.
חכמא/ ‎toon‏ ק.
באבל/ אלממלכה אק.
יטוקו/ ימקו א / 1*: אך אג'קת.

‏0 יקרו/. יקרא ג'.
| 39 פצלת אג'ת.

‏פלי/ ‎fn‏ ע,
או/ אל ג1,
תפסירה/, תפסירהא ץ,

==== PDF page 0120 ====
47

‘2 pas

‎ya‏ תיניד תחייר בלפאצר אלמלך כתירא ותגייר לונה עליה ואלריסח
אלדי מעה מתשוטין,
תהייר/ תחיר ‎Rk‏
‏בלשאצר/, בלשצר אג'.
בלשאצר אלמלך/ אלמלך בלשצר ק / אלמלך בלשאצר ת.
ותגייר/ ותגיר 5. |
ותלריסא/ ואלרייסת ק / ואלרויסץ ת.
‎[VOR‏ אללדון א / אלדין ג' / ‎ton‏ קת.
‎favo‏ מצוה ג'.

‏י, ענד כלאם אלמלך ואלרוסח ‎NIST‏ אלמלכה ‎IIR‏ מגלס פאבתדת
וק*אלת אטאל אללה ‎RPA‏ אלמלך לא תדהלך אפכארך ולא יתגי"ר לונר.;
ואלרוסא/ ואלריסא א / ואלרייסא ק / ואלרויסח ‎eB‏
‏דכלת/. נ': אליהם ‎eB‏
‏מגלס/ אלמגלס חקת.
פאבתדת/ פאבתדאת ק,
יתגייר/ יתגיר 5,

==== PDF page 0121 ====
° 48
‎‘a pas‏
יח, מוגוד פי ממלכתך מן פיה רות אללה אלמקדס מן איאם אבוך
אלאיכאח ואלצקל ואלתכמה בתכמה אלמלאיכה מוגודה פיה ולדאלך
נצבה אסתאדא לאלתכמא ואלמנגמין ואלכסדאניין ואלתהכאם,
ממלכתך/ 263 רגל קת.
10 (1)/ רגל א.
מן (2)/ ומן את.
אבוך]/, אביר א.
ואלעקל/ ואלפקאל ת.
ואלחכמה/, וחכמה א,
מוגודה/ מוגוד ת. |
ולדאלך/. לדלך א,
נצבה/ נ': ‎nda yar‏ נצר 2.
אסתאדא/ ‎tenor‏ א / אסתאד קת.
לאלחכמא/ אלתחכמא אקת. |
יב, לאגל מא פיה ‎yo‏ אלראי אלפאצל ואלמערפה ואלעקל ופסר אלאתלאט
‎RAI‏ אלאתאדית וותלל אלפקד אלכל מוגוד ‎IS‏ דניאל ‎STOR‏
‏אסמאה אלמלך בלטשאצר אלאן ידעא בה תתי יערפך אלתפסיר,
‎pin fis‏
ורויא/ וירו" אקת.
אלאהאדית/ אלחדות א,
אלעקד, אלעפקוד ת.
אלבל/ בל 8.
‎/73R0072‏ בלסשצר אק / בלט שצר ת,
ידעא/] וידעי ‎Bote / x‏
יערפך/, ‎Was‏ א.
אלתפסור/, באלתפסיר 5.

==== PDF page 0122 ====
49

‎pas‏ תי

‏יג, חיניד אחצר דניאל ‎YA‏ ודד אלמלך פאבתדא וקאל לה אנת הר
דניחל אלד" מן אהל ‎TAR AA‏ אלד סבאהם ‎BIR‏ מן אלשאם,
אחצר/ חצר ק.
פאבתדא/ פאבתדה א / פאבתדאה ק,
*אהל, מק.
גלוה/ גלות ק.
אבי/ 263 אלמלך ‎oR‏

‏יד, וסמפעת ענך אן מוגוד פיך רוח אללה ואוצצת ועקל ‎foam‏
‏פאצלה וגדת פיך,
וסמעת-פיך/ נכתב בכתב ‎TWA‏ שונה משאר הפסוקים א,
וסמעת/ אלדפ סמעת ת.
מוגוד/ ח' ‎ak‏
‏ואיפאת/. ואיבאה אקת.
ופקל/] ‎Trani‏ 2,
פאבלה/, זאודה ח,
וגדת// מוגודה ‎sR‏

‎TRIN LT!‏ אצעדד בין ידי אלתכמא ואלמנגמין אן יקרון הדא אלכתחב
ויערפונ" תפסירה ולם דסתטיעו תפסור לפצה לאכבאר;
אלאן-לאכבבאר//, נכתב בכתב ‎TIA‏ שרנה משאר הפסוקתם &
אלאן/ ואלאן אקת.
אצעדו/ פקד אדכלו א / פאצעדי ע,
בין ידי/ אלד תצרתי א / אליד ק / קדאמי ת.
אלתכמא/ הכמא 5.
ואלמנגמיך/ ומנגמין על" 2.
אן יקרון/ ליקרו ק / לוקרון ‎eX‏
‎feria‏ הדו ק.

‏ויערפוני/, ו"ערפוב (מופיע בסוף שורה) ק.

‏יסתטיעו-לאכבאר/ יטמיקו עלי ביתן כלמה ואחדה 22

==== PDF page 0123 ====
20

‘a ‏פרק‎

טז, ‎WIRD‏ קד סמעת ענך אנך תסתטיע אן תפסר אלתפאסיר ‎FINN‏ אלעקד
אלאן אמכנך אן תקרא הדא אלכתאב ותערפוני תפסירה תלבס
אלחמרה ותטווק בטוק אלדהב ותלי תלת אלממלכה,
פאבי/ ‎Tans‏ א.
תפסר/, תפסיר 2.
אלעקד/ אלעקוד ת.
אלאן/ אן 2 / 263 אן אק.
הדא הדי ק,
ותערפונ+/ ותפרפני אקת,
תלבס/ ותלבס ת.
ותפווק/ ‎eR pint‏

יד, תיניד חגאבה דניאל וקאל אמא עמאיאך פתבקא ענדך ואמא גואיזך
פהבהא לגירד לכנד אקרא אלכתאב לאלמלך ואערפה תפסורה,
חיניד-לגירו], מפופמש וחסר 2<

עטחיחך/ חעמאיחך ‎oH‏

וחמח/ פחמח ת.
פהבהא/ הבהא ק.
לכני/ ולכני את.
אלכתאב לאלמלך/ לאלמלך אלכתאב 2.
לאלמלך/ ללמלך ‎oR‏

ית, ואקדם קבל ‎TORT‏ יא איה אלמלך תעלם ‎TR‏ אללה אלעתאלח אעמא
בכתנצר אביך אלמלך ואלטרף ואלוקחר וחלבהץ,
דאלך/, דלך 8 / נ': חנת תקת.
יח איה יאדהת ת.
אללה/ אלאלחה ‎FL‏
‏חאלעחלו/ אלפלי ‎oR‏
‏בכתנצר/ בכת נצר קת.
אביך/ אב*ך א / אבור 2

==== PDF page 0124 ====
51

‘a pg

יט, ומך שרף מח אעמאה בחן גמיע אלשעוב ואלצמם ואהל אללגחת
יתקונה ויכאפונה פמן שא קתל ומן שח אסתבקא ומן שא רפע
ומן שח חטח.
מא-חם/ ממושמט 8 .
שרף], סרחף 1.
קתל], קבל 5.

כ ולמ* עצם קלבה דעלת נפסה ‎WR‏ אלתוקה אהט מן כרסד מלכה
ווקארה זאל פנה, \
ולמא] ולמי ת.
עצם/ פטס 5.
אלתוקה/ אלאתקאת ק.
‎on on /oner‏

כח, ומן בין אלנאס נפי וראיה צחר מע ‎ONT‏ אלצהרא ומאוה ‎BO‏
‏אלערביד יגתדי אלפטב כאלבקר 423391 מן פל אלסמא חתי
‎RI TINK‏ אללה מסלט עלי ‎WIA‏ אלנאס למן שא דנצבה להם .
ורחיה צחר/ וצאר ראיה 2.
צאר/ תי ת.
וחש/, אלוחש ‎«Rk‏
‏אלצהרא/ ת' א / אלצחרי ‎Bb‏
‏ומחוה/ ומחתואה ‎pe‏ / ומא מה ת.
אלערביד/ אלערבד א / אלעראביד קת. .
‎fon‏ נדא ‎of‏
‏אללה/ 363 אלפלי 5,
מסלט] מצלם ‎op‏

\ שת], ‎“eu‏ ת.
ינצבה להם/ אצטאה ויגוז )263 לה ק) אן ינצב לה (ח' ‎(p‏
‏אלוציצ (אלוצופ ק / אלוקיצ ‎(n‏ מנהם אקת.

==== PDF page 0125 ====
22
פרק ‎‘a‏
‏כב, ואנת יח בלטפאצר אבנה ‎oF‏ תתוצע מע מא קד וקפת פלי גמיצ דתלך.
בלמשחצר/ בלשצר קת.
תתוצפ/ תתבע ק / תתנאצט 5,
כג, ולכנך תרפעפ עלי רב חלסמא פאהצרת בין ידיך אניה ‎AHA‏ ושרבת
אנת ואלרוסא והראריך וסראריך אלכמרא בהא וסבחת לאלאהה אלדהב
וחלפצה ואלנהחס ואלתדיד ואלכשב ואלתגאר אלדי ‎WAN OF‏ ולם
תסמע ולא תעלם שיא ולם תבגל אללה אלדי נסמתך פו ידה וגמוע
אחואלך לה,
£13371 לכנר 2«
חניה/, חבייה .
וסרבת/. פשרבת 5.
ואלרוסא/ ואעלריסא א / ואלריוסא ק / ואלרויס" ‎cB‏
‏והראריך/ וחראירך ת.
חלבמרח] חלכמר ץ / חלבמר קת.
וסבחת/ וסבתחתם 2
לאלאהה] אלהה א / לחלהה ק / לאלאהת ת.
ואלחגחר/ ואלתגר ת,
אלדי/ חלתי ‎«PR‏
‏07{ לח אקם. |
077 (1)/ רלח חקת.
סיח] שירח ק.
. אללה/ לאלאלצה ת.
כד, חינוד בעת ‎Yo‏ הצרתה ‎RIAA‏ אלכף פרסמת הדח אלכתחב.
בהדאפ] בהדה 8 / בהדה ק.
פרסמת/ ‎noon‏ ת.
‎feta‏ הדו ק.

==== PDF page 0126 ====
53
‎‘a pas‏
כה, ‎RIAD‏ אלכתחב אלמרסום ‎VINK RINK‏ 1777 וזן וכסר כפר,
והדא/ ‎pata‏ / נ': הו חק.
אלמרסום/, ח' 2.
אחצא/ אחצי קת.
ווזן/ וזו א.
וכסר/ כסר א.
כו, והדא תפסיר הדה אלכלמאת אמא אלאהצא פאן אללה קד אחצת ‎Ato‏
‏: מלכך ותממהת,
‎friar‏ והדי ‎ep‏
‎/ROR‏ תמא אמח ת.
אחצא/ אחצי ‎oR‏
‏כז, ואמחת ‎[TR‏ פאנך וזגת פי מיזאן פוגדת נאקצת,
פתנר/ ‎fn‏ ק. ב
וזנת, פוזנת ק.
כח, ואמא אלכסר ‎Ips‏ כסר מלכך וסלם ‎WRX‏ מאהאת ופארט,
פקד/ ‎airs‏ קד ת. '
מאהחת/ מדי אק.
ופחרס, ופרס אק.
כט, תינול אמר בלשאצר פאלבסו דניאל אלחמרה וסווקוה בטוק תלדהב |
ונאדו עליה ‎[RA‏ יל% תלת אלממלכה,
בלפחצר/ בלשצר 5ק.
פאלבטו/, פתלבטס ‎eB‏
‏אלחמרה/, המרה 2
ופווקוּה/ ופוקוה תת / וסווקה ק.
‎IS 44‏ תלך אללולה קתל בלשחצר חלמלך אלבסדאגית,
פי/ ‎Rag‏
‏בלשחצר], בלשצר תע.
אלכפדחניח], חלכסדאני אקת.

==== PDF page 0127 ====
54

כתב%ף וד: א,ק,ק',ת,ג?,

א, ‏ תם צאר אלמלך אלד דרווש אלמאדד ‎WT‏ שביה באבן תנתיך
וסתחן סנה,
דריוש/ דחרח 5.
אלמחדי/ אלמדי ק.
תנתין/ אתנדך את / אתנין ק.

ב,. ‎ART‏ מן ראדה אן ינצב 49 ממלכתה מחיה ועשרין בטריקא
יתצרפון פי גמיעה",

ג, ופוקהם תלאתה וזרא ‎WIR‏ דניאל ואחד מהם 899 יכון אולאוך
אלוורא יעטונהא אלרא3 ולא ותאדא אלמלך,
תלאתה, גי ת.
‎/ona‏ מנהם חקת.
אלוזרת/ ח' ק.
יעמונהא/ יעספובה" א / יעטונהם קת.
יתחדא/ ‎stent‏ 8 / יתחדי ק,

ד, ‎TIAN‏ באן דניאל מתגלב על אלרוסח ואלבטארקה לעל חן פיה
‎PRA‏ ראצ ואלמלך עאזם אן ינצבה לגמיע חאלממלכה,
מתגלב/ מתגלבח א,

99/ צלח אקת.
אלרוסא/ אלוזרח אקת.
לצל/ לצלה חקת.

==== PDF page 0128 ====
55

‎pag‏ ב*

‏ה, חיניד כאן אלוזרא ואלבטארקה יסלבון אוה עלה יגדונהא עלא
דניאל מן גה8 אלממלכה ולם ימכנהם אן יגדד עליה ‎Sou Aer‏
או גנאזה ‎FIR YO‏ חנה אלאמין פלא ‎ADT‏ ולא גלמה תוגד ‎Savoy‏
‏היניל-פלה(1)/, חסר ג?.
כאן/ כחנו ‎oP‏
‏יטלבון/ יטלבו ‎oR‏
‏*איה(1)/ ח' אקת.
יגדונהא/ ..,ונהח ג
מן(1)/ פד אג?קת.
אלממלכ8/ אלמלך ג?.
ולם/ פלם אג? / לם קב.
עליה/ ח' חקת.,
איה(2)/ חות ‎ne‏ / אוית ק / ח* ג?.
פלה(2)/ ‎tn‏ ג2.
‎Yaar fase‏ ] ג?.
אלאמין/ חסר ו
פלא/ ולח ק.
ולא ולן] ג?.
גלמה/ גלטה אג?ק / גלמה ת.
תוגד עליה/ ‎tain‏ עלוה .

==== PDF page 0129 ====
56
פרע בי
ו, היניד קאלו אולאיך חלקום הודא לא נגד על" דנואל הדא פוא
מן ח*לפלל לכנא נגד דתלך עליה פ% סנה דינה,
אולחיך/ אוליך ג?.
אלקום הודא/ עאנת ‎27a‏
‏הורח/ אד קת.
ל*/ לם ת.
פלי-דינה/ לדנוחל עלה אלא מן גהה בה דדדנה ג?.
דנוחאל הדח/ הדא ‎FRIST‏
‏שדת] ‎te‏ ק.
לבנא/ לכן ת.
דאלך/ ‎fn‏ אק.
עלוה/ עלד ‎PRIVAT‏ ק.
‎CT‏ הינוד בארו אולאחך ‎RAFI‏ ואלבטארקה ‎FIR‏ אלמלך וקאלו לה
אמחל אללה ‎RPA‏ דריוש אלמלך,
צחרו/ צאר א / 5אמב ק / סחר ג?.
אולאיך/ ‎p fn‏ / אולך.] גל.
עלוזרא/ אלוזרח אקת ‏ / 3 גל.
אלו/ אל ג?.
וקאלו/, פקאלו אג?ת.
‎pin far‏
‎p in favor‏
‎fetta‏ דרויש ‎afin f/f p‏

==== PDF page 0130 ====
57
פרע בי \
ה, קד אשארו ‎VIDA‏ אגלא אלממלכה ואלחמרח ראלבטארקה ואלרוסא

וחלנלפא באן *"עהד אלמלך ‎TAY‏ ודתצר הצרא אן כל מן יטלב
מלבה מן מעבוד ‎FEI‏ אנסאן ‎RIV‏ אלמלך אלד תלאתין ‎DIT‏ ורמא
‎AD‏ אלי גב אלחסד,
חברא-אלאסד/ מסושמש והסר ‎oR‏
‏אשארו/ אפחר אג?.
אגלא/ אלאגלח ג?.
אלממלכה-ואלבלפא] אלרוסת ואלכלפאך ‎af‏
‏ואלאמרא/ אלאמרא ‎oR‏
‏ואלרוסא/ ואלרואסץ א / ואלרויסח ‎2p‏
‏באן יעהד/ ‎ton‏ .
אלמלך/ ‎Wa}‏ ג?.

wn pr ‏פהדף‎ /tay
‏ג?.‎ Fine / ‏ויחצר/, ריחפר א‎
‏חצרא/. הדרא ג?.‎
‏*ן/ נ': יכוך אג?ק'ת.‎
‏ומלב/, סלב אג?ק'ת.‎
‏קית.‎ on ‏מו(2)/ ב':‎
‏יחי אן ג?.‎
‏סו*/ סוי ק'ת.‎
‏תלחתין/ ל' ג?.‎
‏יום/ ירמא ג?ק'ת.‎

==== PDF page 0131 ====
58
‎pag‏ ב*
‎Ve‏ נריד אלאן וא אייך] אלמלך אן תקים הדא אלחצר ותרסמה פי
כתחב ‎WRIT‏ לא יגייר כסנן ‎ARARD‏ ופארס אלדי לא תזול,
נריד/. חסר ג?.
יח איי 2 רא רהת + / ‎RRA‏ ג?.
‎{fre‏ איה ק'ת / ‎ave‏
‎ria‏ הדא ‎op‏
‏אלחצר/ אלחפר 8 / אלחדר ג?.
ותרסמה/ [ ]סמה ג.
ואן/ ח* אג?.
לא(ו) / ולח אג?.
יגיור/, דגיר % / יגיר 2
מאהאת], מדי אג? / מחאאת ‎cn‏
‏ופארס/, ‎visi‏ אג?.
אלדו/ חלתי אג?ק'ת.
*, פענד ‎WRT‏ רסם דרידש חלכתאב באלחצר,
פעבד] ‎tay‏ ג?.
‎Lert‏ דלך א / צלך ג2.
‎7a [ Jn Lov‏
דריוש/ נ': אלמלך אג?ק'ת. .
באלחצר/. באלתטר א / באלהדצ ‎52a‏

==== PDF page 0132 ====
59
פרק ב'
יא, פלמא עלם דניאל אן אלכתאב קד ‎DOT‏ צאר אלי מנזלה ולה כויך
מפתוחה פי גרפתה הלא ירושלם ותלחאת מראר פי כל ום] ‎thao‏ 299
רכבתחאה ויצלי וישכר רבה עלי מא כאן סבפלה ‎YR‏ יצנע קבל דאלך.
פלמח] פל ח ג?.
דביפל, ד* ‎7a‏
‏18/ בחן א.
קד קד ג?.
רסם/ רסם ג?.
‎/1R3‏ סאר ‎7a‏
‎fan‏ ולח ב / ‎Sn‏ ג?.
כוין/ כוי א / וכוא ,2 / ‎wis‏ פ'ם.
הדא/ הדח פי.
ירושלם], ירושלם ג?,
ותלחת/ ותלת א / ‎fay‏ ג?.
מרחר/. מראת א / מראת ג?;
[יופ]/ יוס אג??'ת / ח' ב / נ': הו אג?ק'ת.
יגתו/, יגת קית.
רבבתאה], רכ" ה ג?.
מא-סבילה/, סביל ‎RO‏ כאן אג?,
אן יצבע/ צאנפא מן א / יצנע ‎Wo‏ ג?.
דתלך/ דלך ‎.'p yt / 2aR‏

==== PDF page 0133 ====
60
‎pas‏ בי
יב. חיביד תחכר ‎PRIIR‏ אלקום עלי דניאל פוגדוה יתהנן ויטלב
בין ידי רבה,
חיניד/ ‎tain‏ ק'.
תחכר/ תהסס *ג?ק'ת.
אולאיך אלקום/ ‎my Vesey‏ ג?.
יתחנן ריסלב/ יטלב ויתחנך *גל.
ווסלב/, נ': מן ק'ת.
בין ידי/ ‎yaa‏ ידי (נמחק בקו וכתוב למעלה: אזר ךָ..] ג?.
יג, חיניד תקדמו ‎WITT‏ אלמלך בסבב חצרה אליס קד רסמת אלחצר
חנה אי ‎FROIN‏ טלב מן ‎FR‏ מעבוד ואי אנסאן ‎RID‏ אלמלך ‎VIR‏
‎VARIA‏ יום ירמא בה אל*" גב אלאסד אגאבהם אלמלך וקאל
אלאמר יקינח 1303 מדי ופארס אלדי לא תזול,
וכלמו/ פכלמו אג?ק'ת.
חצרה/ חלחפר א / חלהדר ג?.
רסמת/ רסמ ] ג?.
אלהצר-אי(1)/ ‎ton‏ ג?.
אלחצר/ אלהסר א / אלאמר ת.
אנסאן(1)/ [|לאנסאן ג.
מלב/. יטלב אג?.
‎Lia‏ 13 ג?.
*י(2)/ ‎tn‏ 72
מעבוד/ 363 רמן ת.
וחי] זי / ‎aR‏
‏תלחתין/ תלתין א / ל' ג?.
תלאתין-מדי/ ‎aR WON‏
יום/ יום* ג?ק'ת.
אגאבהם/ אגאבה ת / פאגאבהם ג?.
*למלך(3)/ ח' ג?.
וקאל/ פקאל ‎.'p‏
‏יקינא/ ‎Fixer‏ ] ג?.
כטסנן-ופארס', חסר ג.
מדי/ מאהחת קת ופארס, ופרס 8, | אלדי], אלתי אג?ק ת.

==== PDF page 0134 ====
61
‎pas‏ גי
יד, חיניד חגאבו בין ידי ‎WOIR‏ וקאלו אן דניאל אלדי מן אהל
גלוה אליהוד לם וקבל לאלמלך אמרא ולם ילתפת ‎FOR‏ אלחהצר
אלדו רסמתה ותלאת מראר פו כל ‎[ov]‏ יסלב טלבתה,
‎fn fan‏
אן/ פאן אג?. 0/3
אלדי/ ‎Sn‏ ג?.
אהל/ ‎fn‏ ת,
גלוה/ גאליה ,
לם/ ליטס 5. |
לאלמלך/, ללמלך א / לאלמלך ג?.
אמרא- ילתפת/, חסר ג?.
אלחצר/ ‎Vande‏ א / אלחדר 323
רסמתה/, רסמת 73 / רסמתחה לית.
ותלחת/ ותלת א / וג' ג?. |
מראר/, מראת 8ג.
פי-מלבתה//, ימלב מלבתה פי כל יום ג?.
[יום]/ יוס אג?ק'ת.
מו, חיניד למא סמע אלמלך הדא אלאמר שק עליה גדא וודר באלה פד
תכליץ דניאל ‎OFT‏ יזאל חרוצח פי תכליצה אלי מגיב אלשמס,
למא/ ח' ג?.
‎fn feta‏ ג?.
וודר/, וודר א / ודר ג? / ורד ק'ת.
באחלה/, [|אלה ג?:
פי(1)/ 73 72
תכליץ/, תכלץ אג?.
יזאל/ וזל ג?.
פי(2)/ עלי אג?ק'ת.
תלליצה/. תכלצה אגַ?.
אלי-אלשמס/ מפושטש ת.
אלי/ ‎Fon‏ ג?.
מגיב) [..)] 7ת ב?.

==== PDF page 0135 ====
62
‎pis‏ בי
טז, היניד שגבו אולאדך אלקום עלי אלמלך וקחלו לה יעלם אלמלך ‎VR‏
‏מן סנן מדי ופרס אן כל תצר ורסם יקדמה אלמלך לא יגייך,
שגבו/, שגב ת.
אולאיך/ הוליך ג?.
אלקום// אלוזרת ואלבסארקה אק'ת ‏ / נ': ואלוזרא ואלבסארקה (2.
מדי/ מאהחת ‎|p‏ / מחהחה ת. | |
אן(2)/ נ': יכון אג?ק'ת.
הצר/ הטר א / הדר ג?.
‎/aon‏ ורסוּם 21 / ג': אן ‎np‏
‏יגייר/. יגיר א / יזול .
יז, חיניד ‎WR‏ אלמלך פגד בדניאל ‎WAT‏ בה פי גב אלאסוד פאבתדאה
וקאל לה אלחאהך אלדי תעבדה דאימא הו יכלצך.
‎fain‏ חינד ג?.
פגי/ פאתי ג?ק'ת.
‎a ion Aan‏
פי/ ‎sor‏ 2
גב אלאסוד/ ‎tore... Ja‏ 2
אלחסוד/ אלאסד אק'ת.
פאבתדאה/. פאבתדי א / פאבתדח קית / פאבתרח ג?.
אלאהך/ אלהך ‎oR‏ : |
‎fin‏ והו ג?.

==== PDF page 0136 ====
63
פרק 1‘
יח, ‎BA‏ גי בהגר עצים פוצע עלי פם אלגב וכתמה אלמלך בכאתמה
וכוחתם ריסא לילא יתגייר רחיה ‎TH‏ דניחל,
גי/ ‎Vir‏ ג? / אתי ק' / אתח ם.
‎Jaana‏ בצכרה £23
עבים/ ‎men‏ 5 / פפימה ג?.
פובע/ פודעה ג?.
אלגב// *לך] 273
‎fony‏ ך ‎at‏ ג?.
בכאתמה], ‎ot “naa‏
וכוחתם], וכאתם אג?.
ריס*/ אלרותאסח ‎BR‏ / תלרוסף ג? / *לרויסח ק'2.
לולא בלח א / בחלא ג? / ללא ק'ת.
יתגייר/. יתגיר א / יתניר ג?.
‎Lm‏ היניד ‎ARS‏ אלמלך אלד היכלה פבחאת טאויא ‎OFF‏ יהצר כואנח
בין ידיה פארק נומה,
אלמלך/. ח' ק'ת.
אלי/ אלן] ג. \
פבחת/ ובאת פיב / פבחת ‏ ג?;
ולם/, חסר ג?.
כוחנ*/ חלכואנ* ג?.
ביו/ בו 2'.
בין ידיה/ ‎ofa fn‏
פחרק/ ופארק ו

==== PDF page 0137 ====
64
‎‘a pag‏
כ, תיביד קאם אלמלך ענד מטלע אלפגר וצאר ‎VR‏ אלגב מבחדרח,
פבד/ מפ גל.
אלפגר/ אלפגר (אותיות פגר נמתקו בקו ונכתב 99 גביהן: מפגר) ג.
‎[Jor Lon‏ 273
אלגב/ גב 5 / 7 ‎aj‏ גל / ג': אלאסד ג?.
מבאדרא/ מבאורח ג?.
כח, פלמא קרב מנה צות בדנפאל בצות הזין ‎VRPT‏ לה ית דנואל ‎TAY‏
‏אללה אלחי אלאהך אלדד תעבדה דחתומא הל אמכן כלאצה לך ‎WO‏ אסד,
‎7a ] Je rors‏
מנה/, ‎ofa av.‏
בדביאל/ לדביחל 5 / לדניחל ק' / ‎For‏ דנוחל ג?.
בצות/ בצות ג?. |
חזין/ תזיך ג?.
אללה/ אלאלה / / אלאלאה ת.
אלחי/ אלהדר פית.
אלאהך/. אלהך ‎opr‏
‏אלדי/ ‎Jor‏ ] ג?.
תעבדה/ תעבדה ג?.
דחומח/ דחיםת ‏ ג?.
‎fon‏ הל ג2.
אמכן/ ‎Razak‏ ג2.
כלאצה לך/ חן יכלצך ג?.
תסד/ אלאסד ‎npr‏ / אלגב ג?.
כב, ‎TWIN‏ כאטב דניאל אלמלך וקאל לה חפאל אלאלה ‎RPA‏ תלמלך,
כחטב/ באפב ג2.
‎{no‏ ח' אק'ת.
אלחלה/ אללה חק'ת.

==== PDF page 0138 ====
65
‎pas‏ 1“
כג, רבי בעת במלכה פסד פם אלאסד ‎ANN‏ לש תוויגי ודאלך למא הצרני
בין ידיה מן אלהסנאת ואיצא בתצרתך יא אייה אלמלך לם אעמל
סייה,
‎ftps‏ 779 ג?.
אלאסד/ תלחסד ג?.
‎Joo ann‏ 7794 7 2;
תודיני/ תודבי א.
ודאלך/, ודלך ‎an‏ / ודלך ק'.
הברנו/ ‎a On‏
אלחסנאת/ אלהסנח ק',
בחצרתך/., בהבסתך (למעלה מאות ספ נכתב ר באותו כתב היד) ג?.
יח תייה יתיה" % / איהח ג?.
אייה/. איה ק'ת.
סייה סיה ‎Zan‏ / סחיה ק'ת.
כד, ‎TAIN‏ למא סמע ‎WIR‏ הדא אלאמר סרה גדא ‎WORT‏ באצעאד דניחל
מן אלגב פאצעד ולם יוגד פיה שי מך אלפסאד ‎JOR ROD‏ ברבה,
חיניד-ברבה/, מטושמש לגמרי א.
חיביד/ חיניד ג?.
‎fw‏ פיח ק'ת.

==== PDF page 0139 ====
6
‎“a pas‏
כה, פאמר ‎TIM‏ פגאו באולחיך אלקום אלדי מהלו בדניאל רמו בהם
פי גב חלאסד ‎BA‏ ובניהם ונסאהם ‎ROG‏ וצלו אלי קערה חתי תסלטת
עליהם ‎TORIR‏ פדקת גמיע עצמהם,
פאמר/ ותמר 5ַג? ‎wp‏
‏פגחו/ פגי א / ‎nip ones‏ / פאתר ג?.
באולאיך אלקום)/ באלקום ג?.
באולציך/ בחוליך א.
אלדי/ אללדין א / אלדין ג? / אלדין ‎op‏
‏רמו ורמי אג?קית. \
המ/ ח' אג?ק'ת.
וצלו/ ובלך ‎3a‏
‏אלי קערה/ *%לקערה ג?.
תסלטת/ תסלט" ת.
עליהם//, ח' ק'ת ‏ / ‎ooo‏ ?.
אלאטד/ אלך | ] ג. \
‎avon /npts‏ ג?.
עבמהם/ עסאמהם א / עסאמהם ג? / עצאמהם ק'ת.

==== PDF page 0140 ====
67
‎pas‏ ב' |
כו, חיניד ‎ana‏ דריוש חלמלך אלי 9109 חלשעוב וחלאמם ודוי אללגאפ
אלמקימין פי ‎VIVA‏ שעוב אלבלאד סלאם עליכם וברכאת אללה,
היניד-ואלחמם/ מטושסט א.
אלמלך/ ה* ג?.
ודוי/, ודוה ת.
‎val) drat pare‏ ג?.
פי ממוטמש ‏ ב*.
גמיע-אלבלאד/ חסר ‎7a‏
‏שעוב/ ‎‘n‏ אק'ת.
אלבלאד/ אלבלדאן ‎np‏
‏סלאם/ סלם אַג?.
עליכם-אללה/ אללה עליכם וברכאתה אק'ת.
וברכאת אללה/. וברכאתה ג?.
כז, קד ‎NWR‏ באמר פי גמיפ סלטנה ממלכתי אן יכונו מתקיין פאזעיך
מן תלחה דניאל אד ‎IN‏ אלאלאה אלתי אלקיום אלי אלאבד ומלכה לח
יזדול וסלטחאנה אלי ‎TSR‏ אלעאלם,
סלמנה/ סלמחן 22 / סלטאנה ת.
ממלכתי] ממל[ | ]ד ג?.
יכונו/ יכוצו ג?.
מתקיין/ מ[ ] ג?.
פאזעין-א1/. חסר ג2.
פחזצפין] פזציך 2.
‎fin‏ הו אג?ת / הו" ‎wp‏
‏אלחלחה] אלאלה ת / אלחה ג?.
אלקיום/ אלקיוס ג?.
אלי(1)/ אלר ג?.
ומלכה, וממלכתה ג?.
יזול/ תזול ג?.
אלפחלט/ אלפ[ ] ג2.

==== PDF page 0141 ====
68
פרק ר*
כתה, והו אלמנגי ואלמכלץ באנע איאת ותעגובאת פי ‎RODIN‏ ואלחרץ
אד ‎IRIIT PID‏ מן יד אלאסד,
והו-צאנ2ע/ חסר ‎7a‏
‎/virs‏ רצתבפ אק'ת.
‎SIR‏ .2
איתת/ | אואת ב.
ואעגובאת/ ‎ARIAT‏ גל.
אד חלדי ג?.
יד/ ח* ‎7a‏
‏כם, ‎oh‏ אצלה דניאל פי מלך דריוש וכורש אלפארסי,
‎[Jn Loh‏ ג?.
אצלת/. 263 תאל אק'ת ‏ / ‎ton‏ (אבל ‎ews‏ מקום בעד תאל) ג?.
פי-אלפארסי/ ‎Jon‏ 273

==== PDF page 0142 ====
69
‎pas‏ די
כתבי יד: א,ק,קי,ת,ג?,ג?.
‎CR‏ פי אלסנה אלתולח מך ‎WH‏ בלטאצר מלך ‎VARA‏ ראי דביאל ‎ROI‏
‎RIN ROD‏ עינה 101 פי מצגעה ‎AND TIN‏ דאלך אלתלם וקחל 79
אוול אלכלאם.
אלאולא/ אלאולי ‎oR‏
‏בלשאצר]/, בלשצר ‎np‏
‏כמא/ כמי ת,
תרא, ‎tan‏ א. |
‎/naiy‏ ציגתה ‎np‏ |
דתלך/ דלך א / ‎rt‏
‏אוול/ אול א.
ב,. ‎RNIN‏ דניאל וקאל ראית ‎FS‏ רויאי פי אלליל כאן ארבע גהאת
*לסמא מצדרה מנצמה אלי אלבחר אלכביר,
אבתדא/ אבתדי אק'ת..
פי(1)/ ב': םח ק.
רויחי/ רוחאיי א ‎ /‏ ירח ק / מי* ת.
פי(2)/ ח' ת.
אללול/, אלול ‎oD‏
‏ארבע/ ד* ת.
ג, וכאן תרבע אשכחץ עבימה באפעדה ‎Yo‏ אלבחר כל וחחד מתגייר ‎Yo‏
‏אלאכר.,
‏ארבפ], ארבעה 5.
עבימהּ/ פסימה 1.
מתפגייר/, מתגיר ת.

==== PDF page 0143 ====
/ 70
‎pas‏ 3‘
ד, אלשכץ חאלאוול ישבה אלאסד ולה אגנחה כאלנסר ‎ON‏ ראית כחן
*גנהתה אנתתפת ורפע מע דאלך מן אלארץ ‎of‏ אקים עלי רגלאך
מתל אנסאן ותעפד ‎py‏ אנסאן.
אלחוול/ אלאול ‎oR‏
‏אגנחתה/ ג': קד קת.
דחלך/ דאך *.
רגלחן// רגלין את.
‎/1RDIR‏ אלנחס אקת.
ה, ואלאן טכץ ‎IIR‏ תאני שביה אלדב וקד אקים ‎ION‏ גאנב ‎TART‏
‏וכחאן פי פמה תלחתה אצלאע מתעלקה ביןך אסנאנה והכדא יקאל
לה ‎op‏ פכל אללתם אלכתיר,
ואלחן/ ‎1x31‏ חקת.
שביה/ ישבה 5 / שבה ק.
אלי גחנב/ אלחגחנב ת,
פמה/ פיה ‎ara / x‏ קת.
תלחתה/ ‎Sa‏ % / תלחת ק.
דהכדח/ והכבדי ק.
והכדא-אלכתיר/ ‎Ron‏
‏ו, ובעד דלך ראית כאן שנכץ אכר כאלנמר ולה ארבעה חגנההּ ‎Wee‏
‏עלד ‎AINE‏ ולה ארבעה רוס וקד ‎AOR VST‏ סלטאן.,
שכץ/ שכצחא ת.
ארבפה/ ד' ‎pp van / xR‏ / ג': מן אקת.
אגנחה/ אגנחת ק.
‎wee‏ אלטחיר אקת,.
בהרה-סלסחן/. תפר א,
סלטאן/ צלטאן ק.

==== PDF page 0144 ====
71
‎‘x pas‏
| ז, ובעד ‎PRT‏ ראית פי רויא אלליל כאן שכץ ראבע פזיע היוב

שדיד גדא ולה אסנאן כבאר מן חדיד יאכל בהא וידק ואלבאקו
ידוסה ברגלאהּ ‎ANT‏ מתגייר ען סאיר אלאטכחאץ ‎IAIR‏ קבלה ולה
עשרה קרון.
‎LPI‏ דלך ת.
רויץ/ ר'יח ת.
פזיפ/ ‎xis”‏ ק / ‎passa‏ |
היוב/ מהיב ת. ו ,

| שדיד/ ‎Sn‏ א / ‎fn‏ (אבל נשלם בגליון) ק.
ידוסה-קרון/ ‎aon‏ ומטוסמש ‏ ת.
ברגלאה//, ברגליה ק.
‎fino‏ מתגיר ת.
ען/ מן ת. \
אלתו/] אלדי א.
עשרה], פטר 1.

==== PDF page 0145 ====
72

‘x pas

‎GN‏ פבין מא ‎RIR‏ מתפכר פי תלך אלקרון פאדח בקרין חכר סגיר קד
‎NAD‏ פי מא בינהא ותלחתהּ מן קרון אלאולי אנקלעת ‎Yo‏ בין ידיס
וכאן עיון כעיון אלנאס פי דאלך אלקרין ופם יתכלט באלכבחיר.
פבין/ וביך קת. |
פבין מא/ ובינםח א. .
מתפכר/. מתפרס ‎x‏ / מתפסר קת.
פאדא] ‎Vine‏ ק. |
בקרין/ בקרן אקת.
אכר/ ‎‘n‏ ק.
סגיר/ ‎wax‏ 5 / צגיר קת,
פי ‎/en‏ פומת ‎oH‏
‏מא/ ‎yn fn‏
בינהח/ בינהמח ק / ביניהם 2.
ותלאתה/ דתלתה ת.. .
קרון/ חלקרון חקת.
אלאולי/ אלארל א / אלאוחיל 5 / ‎fn‏ ק.
וכאן/ ולה ק.
דאלך/ דאך א / דאך ת.
ח*לקרין/ אלקרון קת.

‎LD‏ תם ראית כאן כראסי קד ‎ANI‏ וכאן שיכא קד ‎VIA‏ פוקהח ולבאסהת
כאלתלג אלאביץ ושער ראסה אביץ כאלצוף וכרסיה מן נאר לה
שעחע ולואלבה נאר משתעלה,
כין/ חי ק.
ולבאסה/ לבאסה ק,
כאלתלג אלאביץ/ אביץ כאלתלג א,
וכרסיה/ וכראסיה ק / וכרסייה ת.
מן נאר/ ‎op Sn‏
לה// להח חאקת,
משתעלה], משפעל ת.

==== PDF page 0146 ====
73
‎pas‏ די
י, ונהר מן נאר יגרי מן בין ידיה ויכרג ואלף אלוף יכדמונה \
ורבואת רבואת יקוטון בין ‎ATI‏ וקד וצע אלחכם ונשרת אלדיחוין,
יגרי/ יגר ת / נ': ויכרג קת. |
‎fara.‏ ח' קת..
ואלף/, ואלוף ‎oR‏
‏יכדמונה/ ‎fn‏ 2. .
ורבוחאת/ ורבוה ק, .
יקומון/ נ': מן קת. -.
אלדיאוין/ אלדוחאוין א.
יח, ‎On‏ רחית כאן ‎JON JO‏ אלכלמאת חלעצימה ‎VOR‏ כאן אלקרין יתכלם
‎RAI‏ אסתחק גמלה ‎PIR‏ אן קתל ובחד גסמה וגעל וקידא לאלנאר,
מן/ נ': אגל אקת. . |
אלעבימה/ חלפפימה ת,
אלדי/ אלתי חק. ‏ .
כאן(2)/ ‎nara‏ אקע..
אלקרין/ אלקרן חקת.
יתכלם/, תתכלם חקת.
אלשנץ/ ב': חלי ת.
קתפל/ יקתל ‎-R‏
‏לאלנאר/ ללנאר ת.
יב, ואמח באקי אלאשכאץ פזאל סלטחנהם וחעטד מהלה פי חיותהם ‎JOR‏
‏וקת וזמאן. |
סלפאנהם/ צלטאנהם ק, .
סלטאנהם-וזמאן/ ‎Ron‏
‏מהלה/. נהלה ת.
פי/ מן קת.
חיותהם/ ‎Bann‏

==== PDF page 0147 ====
74

‘x pas

יג, תם ראית פי ‎RO‏ ירחא ‎JO‏ אלליל כאן שחאבא מקבל מע אלסתאב חתי
בלג אלי מו3פ אלשיך וקדמה בין ידיה,

| תם-ידיה, ‎ton‏ ת.

מך/ פי ע. |
אלסחחאב/ אלסאחב ת.
אלשוך// אלסיף ת.
וקדמה/] פקדמה קת.

יד, פאעטאה חלסלטאן ואלוקאר וחלמלך וגמיע אלשעוב וחלאמם ואהל .
אללגחת לה יסיעון סלטאנה סלמאך אבדא לא יזול ומלכה לא יתגייר,
פאעפטאה-יתגייר/ חסר ת.
פאעסתה] פאפטי ת.
אלסלפאן/ אלצלטחן 2.
ואלוקאר/ חאלוקחר ‎eB‏
‏סלטחנה], צלמאבה.ק.
סלמחן/ צלמחן ק.
אבדא/ אבדי ת ‏ / אלעאלם ק ‏ / ג': אלדי ק.

סר, ‎RAPS‏ כרב ‎INIT‏ אנא דניאל פי גסמי ‎RID‏ עיני אדהשתני,
דניחל] דבי' 5 . \
‎fea‏ וריא ג? ‏ / וריי ת. |
עיבי/ עיביי םש / פיבחי ת / ב': קד ק.
אדהשתבי/, אדהשני אק / ידהשני ‎Ba‏

==== PDF page 0148 ====
5
‎‘x pis‏ |
פז, תקדמת אלי ואחד מן אלוקוף ואלתמטת ‎AID‏ אלצתיתח פי ‎VIDA‏ דאלך
פקאל לי וערפני תפטיר אלאמור.
תקדמת/ פתקדמת ת.
דאלך/. דלך אג7. .
פקתל/ פקחלה ‎ar‏
‏לי/ ‎any‏ \
תפסיר/ תפס ג 5‏ / נ*: דאלך ק2.
יז, ‎ATA‏ אלחשכאץ אלעצאם אלדי הי ארבע הי ‎VAIN‏ ממאלך תקום פי אלאחרץ.
אלאשכחאץ//הדשכחץ ת,
אלצבאם/ אלעמאם ‎Jan‏
‏אלדי, חלתי אגלק.
ארבע(1)/ ארבעה א / ד' ‎a‏
‏הי(?)/ תי 2 של 0 שר |
/ 5
הי ארבע(2)/. | הי ארבע ‎ea‏
‏ארבע(2)/, ד 8.
יח, ‎on‏ יתסלמון אלמלך אלקדוסין אלמתעליון וירתונה אלי אלדהר,
יתסלמון/ יתסלם ‎Far‏ / יסתלמון 2. | .
אלקדוסין/ אלקדיסין ‎3a‏ / אלקדוסיין 2. /
אלמתפליון/ אלעחאליין א / אלעאלי'ן ‎Fa‏ / אלמתעאליין קת.
חלדהר/ נ': ודהר אלדהור אגיקת.

==== PDF page 0149 ====
76 \
\ פרק ‎‘s‏
‏יש, חיניד ארדת חן אסתתבת ‎WR‏ אלשכץ אלראבע אלדי כחן מגיירץ
מן ‎WII‏ פה מפזע גדא אסנאנה מן חדוד ואצפארה מן נהאס
יתעכל בהא וידק ואלבאקי ידוסה ברגלתאה,
ארדת חן/ ‎‘n‏ ק.
אסתתבת/. אסתתבאת ק.
‎rq [ Lior varie‏
מגיירא//, מגירח ת.
פה/ פהו אקת. .
מפופ/ מפזרע ק.
גדח אסבחנה], גן זבה .
ותצפארה], ואספארה ת.
בהא/ ‎ap fn‏
ברגלאה/, ברגלה 5 / ברגליה ק. \
כ, וחמא אלפשר אלקרון אלאואיל אללואתי פי ראסה וחלאכר אלדי
‎Apo‏ ונבת ‎Jo‏ בין ידיה תלאתה ואלקרין מנתצב אלעיודן ופם מתכלם
באלכבחאיר וצאר מנצרה ‎WIR‏ מן נברחיה,
ואמא/ ואמר א. | .
אלעשר/ אלעטרה ת,
‎WIR‏ אלקרון/ אלקרון אלפשרה ק.
אלקרון/. קרון ת.
חלאוחיל/ תח את / אלאולחת ק.
אללוחאתי/ ח' ק. \
וסקט ונבת/ נבת וסקס ‎BPR‏
‏תלאתה], ‎fa‏ ת.
ואלקרין/ ואלקרן אקת. \
אלציון/ ולה עיון א / נ': ולה עיון 5,
מתכלם], ותכלם אקת.
מנצרה/, מנסרה א.
אכתר, ‎Vase‏ ת5.
בפראיה/, נמראיה 8.

==== PDF page 0150 ====
77
‎pis‏ די \
‎LRT‏ וכנת ראית כאן דאלך אלקרין יתארב אלקדוסין ויצפר בהם,
‎fan‏ וכך]. 2.
כאן/ ‎yea‏ 2..
דאלך/, דלך ‎wR‏ |
אלקרין/ אלקרן חת. \
יהארב/ יחאסב ת / יתאבב ‎wa‏
‏אלקדוסין/ אלקדיסין ת.
ויצפר/, ויספר ת.
‎af] Lona‏ 2. |
‎Ld‏ אלי חן גח אלפיך ‎ARIS‏ אלתחכם לאלקדוסין אלמתעאלייך ודנת
אלאגל וורת חלמלך אלקדוסין.
לאלקדוסין/ ללקדיסין ‎oR‏ . \
אלקדוסין/ אלקדיסין א / אלקדוסיין ק.

==== PDF page 0151 ====
78
‎pis‏ 3‘
כג, הכדא קחל תפסיר אלשפכץ אלראבע ממלכה ראבעה תכון פי אלארץ
תגייר.מן תקדם מן אלממאלך וכאנהא תאכל גמיע אלבלאד ‎AVITAL‏
‏ותדקה,
‏הכדא/ הכדי א / הכדי ק. |
קאל תפסיר/ ‎yp‏ 0 .
תפס יר), ‎jor‏ וכח
אלפכץ/ חלס[ 2. \
‎VARI‏ ממלכה, * לראב [מלכה 2. \
ממלכה], חלממלבה גל.
ראבעה/ אלרחבעה ג?.
תכון/ תכן 5.
אלארז/ אל[ ]| 2.
תגייר/. ‎Wan‏ אג?.
‎ro /(1)10‏ אג?קת. |
תקדט-אלממאלך)/, תק[ ‎Tl‏ 2
תאכל/ ‎BU Jen‏ . |
‎Jorma‏ גומיצ ג?.
| אלבלחד/ אלממחלך [ ‎27a‏
‏ותדוסה/. ותדוסהח 5 / []תדוסה" ג?. \
ותדקה/, ותדקהם ג? / ותדקהא ת / ות|ַקה 2.

==== PDF page 0152 ====
79

פרק ד'

כד, ותפסיר אלעשר אלקרון מן תלך אלממלכה יקופ עשר מלוך ואכר
בעדהם ‎Ins‏ יגייר מא תקדם מן אלאוולין ויצע תלאת מלוך.
אלפשר, אלי'* ‏ ל / אלעשרה ק.
אלקרוןו] קרון ‎aR‏
‏פשר], עשרה חקת. |
וחאכר בעדהם/ רבעדהט/ ובעדהם יקום חכר ג?.
וחכר/ נ': יקום אקת.
יגייר/, יגיר אג?.
םא] מן] ג?.
אלאוולין/ אלאולין אג?ת.
ויבע/ ויציע ג?.
תלחת] ‎‘a‏ אג? ‏ / תלחתה ת.

כהּ, וכלאם יתקודלה צלי אלעאלי ויכלק אלקדוסין אלמתפחלייך
ויחמל אן יגייר אעיאדהם וסננהם ויסלמון פי ידה ‎ATO VIR‏
‎[ANTI‏ ונצף,
רתקוולה/, יתקולה 5 / תקולה 71 ‎Of‏ ות7 7 2.
אלפחלי] אלפלי ת,
ויכלק/ ויכלק א / ויבלק ‎Be‏ / מטוטסט ג?.
אלקדוסין, אלקדיסין אג? ‏ / לקדוטיין 2.
אלמתפחליין/. אלמתעאלין ג? / אל[]צליין ק.
ויחםל/ ויומל א / וירמל ג? / ויאמל ק2.
יגייר/, יגיר אג?.
אעיעדהם/ אעדחיהם 5 / אעיאצהם ג?.
אעידהם וסננהם/ מפושטש רמתורר ‏ 2.
וסננהם/ ‎Jor‏ ] ג? .
ויטלמון/ [יסלמוו 2.
פי/ מטדשסט .473 \
ידה-מדה .8‏ ו,, ,ל, ‎oT,‏ 2

ונצף/, 93831 ע.

==== PDF page 0153 ====
= 80
‎pas‏ 2‘
כו, ולמא וצף אלחכם ואזיל סלטאנה וצאר אלי אלנפד ואלאבאדה אלי
‎WIR‏ אלזמאך. -
ו3ף/, רצע אקת... /
ולמח ו3ף/, ולם:.-ך ‎atl‏
‏וחזיל/. חזיל אג?ת.
סלפאבה/ צלטאנה ע.
תלנפד/ אלנפד 23 / נפחד ק / אלנפאד כ ת.
וחלאבחדה/, ואבאדה ק / ואלחבא[ ] ‎22a‏
‏אלי(2)/ []לי.ג?.
אכר/. ‎Wx‏ קת.
כז, וראלמלך ואלסלטאן וחלשרף אלדין למלך גמיע מא תחת ‎RODIR‏ סלמת
אלי אלקום אלקדוסין אלמתעאלייך מלכהם מלך אלדהר וגמיע אלסלאטין
‎ony‏ וסמעון ויסיעוך,
ואלמלך/. ולחלמלך ג?, .
ראלסלטחאן/ ואלצלטחן ‎eB‏ .
אלדין למלך/ אלדך | [אלך גל.
אלדון/ אללדון א / אלדי ת.
למלך/ ללמאלך ‎Rw‏ / לאלממאלך ת.
‎Leo‏ מן ג?. \
אלסמח/ אלסמד ג2.
סלמת/ ‎Sn‏ ת.
אלי/ ‎fn‏ ג?..
אלקום, ח' ע. ,
אלקדוסין/ אלקדיסין א / אלקדוסיין ק ‎J‏ ..,.קד,.ין ג?.
אלמתעאליין/ אלמתעאלוין 21 / אלמתפאלין ת,
‎Las‏ פמלכהם אג?קת.
וגמיע], וגמיע ג?. \
אלסלאפין/ ,..לחטין 0 ק / אלסלח[ ‎f‏ ג?.
‎fond‏ חסר ג?.
וסמעון/, []מעון 72

==== PDF page 0154 ====
81

‘rps

כת, אלי ההנא אבר אלקצה ואנא דנואל קד אדהשתני אפכארי ‎RAD‏
‏ותגיירת סתנתי עליי ‎n3sni‏ אלקצה פי קלבי,
אלי/ חסר ג?. ,
‎fran‏ האהנח אג? ‏ / ב': אבתהח ג?.
‎Riri / prin /rini‏ 2
קד] ‎‘n‏ אקת.
אדהשתני/ אדהפתני ק / ‎ [‏ ]שתני ג?.
ותגיירת/. ותגורת אג?.
עליי/ חסר ‎73a‏ /
וחפ3ת/ ותפפת א / [ ]ת ג2.

af Jor Lizprr \

קלבי], קלבי ‎a‏

