100 


~i^  ^3^U.om 


V  .  T  F  c 


w 


M'u 


\ 


gittKtoa   ^%mmm 


A  COMMENTARY 


/' 


b^' 


ON    THE 


BOOK    OF    DANIEL 


BY 


JEPHET  IBN  ALI   THE   KARAITE 


EDITED  AND   TRANSLATED 

BY 

D.   S.   MARGOLIOUTH,   M.  A. 

LAUDIAN   PROFESSOR  OF   ARABIC  IN   THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD 


t/S« 


^^ 


If 


©xfortr 

AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS 
1889 

\^All  rights  reserved'] 


HENRY    FROWDE 


Oxford  University  Press  Warehouse 
Amen  Corner,  E.C. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Preface v-x 

List  of  MSS.  of  the  Commentary  on  Daniel xi-xiii 

English  Translation 1-87 

Glossary 89-96 

Arabic  Text i-ier 

Appendix n^^ 

Errata lei 


a  2  [II.  3.] 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2007  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


http://www.archive.org/details/commentaryonbookOOjaphuoft 


PREFACE, 


The  life  of  Abu  *Ali  Jephet  ^  has  been  narrated  by  the  authorities 
cited  by  M.  BARGi:s  in  the  Preface  to  his  edition  of  the  Commentary  on 
the  Canticles^,  at  greatest  length  by  J.  FuRST  in  his  Geschichte  des 
Karderthums  ^,  whose  account  is  to  be  supplemented  from  the  notice  of 
Jephet  in  A.  Neubauer's  Aus  der  Petershurger  Bibliothek^.  The 
Commentary  on  Daniel  was  one  of  the  latest  of  his  writings  ^ ;  and  that 
it  cannot  have  been  written  before  990  A.  D.  has  been  shewn  by  PlNSKER^ 
from  the  statement  in  the  Appendix  '^  that  '  the  date  3300  after  the 
Exodus  is  passed  years  ago ; '  now  2448  A.  M.  (the  date  of  the  Exodus) 
+  2300  gives  4748  A.  M.  =  988  A.  D.,  to  which  at  least  two  years  must 
be  added  to  justify  the  expression  in  the  text.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
Commentator  speaks  of  the  Mohammadan  religion  as  '  about  400  years 
old^,'  a  statement  which  gives  us  perhaps  as  terminus  ad  quern  the 
year  1010  A.  D. 


^  His  names  and  titles  are  given  in  full  on  the  Arabic-Hebrew  title-page. 

^  Paris,  1884,  pp.  i,  ii.  ^  Vol.  ii.  124-130.  *  Pp.  15-18. 

^  The  phrase  on  p.  1  ta  .  2  does  not  necessarily  imply,  as  Furst  thinks,  that  he 
had  already  commented  on  all  the  books  of  the  Y'jn . 

^  \>''b,  &"'nS)D3,  p.  88. 

^  p.  ler.  3.  FiJRST's  suggestion  that  we  should  read  ^  ^. ;  ,x>  ijbjJl  jj^  is  not 
likely  to  find  acceptance. 

'  P.  irv.  4.  The  prophecy  that  the  end  is  to  come  in  the  year  400  a.  h.  is  not 
Jephet's,  but  a  false  inference  of  the  scribe  from  this  passage. — R.  Saadia  Gaon's 
date  was  350  a.  h.  (Bodleian  MS.  0pp.  Add.  fol.  64,  p.  75l>). 


vi  PREFACE. 

The  other  historical  allusions  do  not  contradict  this  result.  Jephet 
knows  of  the  taking  of  Antioch,  Tarsus,  and  'Ainzarbah  by  the  Greeks  *; 
these  events  happened  in  359,  354,  and  351  respectively.  The  pillaging 
of  the  Ka'bah  by  the  Carmathians  under  Abu  Tahir  in  317  (929)  is  made 
much  of  ^,  although  the  Black  Stone  was  restored  in  338,  and  the  Temple 
itself  repaired,  of  which  Jephet,  who  has  some  strange  opinions  about  the 
nature  of  the  Ka'bah,  does  not  seem  to  have  heard ;  however,  their  pro- 
hibition of  the  Pilgrimage,  in  which  he  finds  the  fulfilment  of  the  '  taking 
away  of  the  continual,'  lasted  as  late  as  403  (loia)^  ;  and  although  their 
power  was  on  the  decline  after  Abu  Tahir's  death,  they  continued  long 
to  make  themselves  felt  in  Syria  and  Egypt.  In  360  they  take  Da- 
mascus, Ramleh,  and  Jaffa*;  in  o,"]^  (985)  they  capture  Cufa^;  the 
prophecy  therefore  that  'they  will  certainly  take  Baghdad^'  was  quite 
likely  to  be  realised,  and  indeed  had  already  been  partly  realised  in  330  '.. 
We  cannot  therefore  wonder  at  the  important  place  assigned  them  by 
Jephet  in  the  history  of  the  Arabian  empire.  Further,  the  reference  to 
'the  non-Abbasid  lord  of  Islam,  established  at  Baghdad  ^,'  points  to  a  date 
after  334  (945),  when  the  title  of  Sultan  was  conferred  on  the  Buyid 
conqueror^. 


^  P.  irr.  16. 

^  P.  irv.  Just  as  the  Carmathians  are  called  here  by  Jephet  Q'^'lU^p,  so  in 
2  Kings  "i{j>pnn  is  rendered  by  k«^. — For  the  derivation  of  fUa-*^  see  De  Goeje, 
Memoire  sur  les  Carmathes,  p.  iii  of  Appendix. 

^  De  Goeje,  1,  c.  p.  85;   Chron.  Mecc.  ed.  WIjstenfeld,  ii.  249. 

*  Ibnu  '1  Athir  viii.  485. 

^  Ibnu  '1  Athir  ix.  29.     In  this  year,  however,  *.^o*»»-elJ  JU. 
"  P.  irF.  21. 

■^  Abu  '1  Mahasin  ii.  297;  De  Goeje,  p.  50.  In  375  they  have  a  '  representative ' 
(v^Li)  in  Baghdad  (Ibnu  '1  Athir,  1.  c.  p.  30). 

*  P.  I  rf  ut  supra. 

®  Weil,  Geschichte  der  Khalifen,  ii.  696. — The  statement  that  'they  were 
originally  unbelievers'  will  agree  with  the  account  of  their  origin  given  ibid.. 
ii.  652  ;  but  their  identification  with  the  'king  of  the  north'  is  stranger  and  given 
hesitatingly. 


PREFACE.  vii 

The  matter  of  the  Commentary — with  the  exception  of  the  violent 
polemics  against  the  Christians^,  Rabbanites,  and  Muslims ^ — is  probably 
for  the  most  part  traditional,  derived  from  the  '  Doctors  of  the  Captivity  ^' 
some  of  whose  names  are  specified  in  the  Appendix.  The  Commentary 
of  R.  Saadia  Gaon  (El-Fayyumi),  the  object  of  Jephet's  most  bitter  pole- 
mics, has  been  discovered  by  Dr.  Neubauer,  in  a  fragmentary  MS.  of 
the  Bodleian  *.  This  MS.  is  unfortunately  deficient  in  those  parts  of  the 
book  where  Jephet's  attacks  are  most  violent  ^ ;   in  general  the  agree- 


*  See  especially  the  notes  on  xi.  14  (p.  1 11.  14-16).  Some  further  information 
on  the  Christian  religion  is  to  be  found  in  the  note  on  Obadiah  i :   jHT  u-^i  JU. 

y^yso   Ui"  IjJj    »D    Jjw>.j    d^Lllb    ^_yi!>lJ     ;;;-A^^    ^j    ^J^    ^-J^.    f0^    »J^    1^^ 

(!)  v^J  aJL-^.  ^"^  si!  J  ^y^^  ^"^-^  c^  (jJ^  J*  ^'^^^  ^^'^^  ^"!?  ^?^ 

'^  The  number  of  '  Spottnamen '  employed  is  quite  considerable :  plDS  for  J*--,, 
)i^^  for  jjl^J,  mStt  for  d3C;  niin  {J>"'N  is  a  frequent  designation  of  the  Prophet. 
The  MSS.  vary  between  1K''>  and  yiC''. 

^  Some  of  these,  perhaps,  he  imperfectly  understood.  The  Commentator  who 
derived  nBVnno  (p.  !•».  13)  from  the  Chaldee  may  have  spoken  of  the  latter  as  the 
language  of  the  Pharisees= Rabbanites ;  Jephet's  i-^^UJl  would  naturally  mean 
Persian.     His  compiler  in  the  "(B>yn  "1SD  renders  D''J3'l  {"ity?. 

*  0pp.  Add.  fol.  64.     Neubauer's  Catalogue,  no.  2486. 

^  Yet  see  note  on  x.  3  (MS.  p.  134^):  p^i  ntj'ii  Tibx  vh  nnon  an!?  Jy^ 

U^  n  J_J  UJlMj  ^jli  jil  U.JU  'Lj-i<^l.  Jephet's  observation  that  the  Temple 
was  then  standing  is  answered  by  anticipation. — '  The  marvellous  inventions ' 
(p.  ler.  2)  of  El-Fayyumi  concerning  the  'end'  are  probably  the  calculations 


viii  PREFACE. 

ment^  of  the  Gaon's^  opinions  with  those  of  the  Karaite  are  more  striking 
than  their  divergence. 

The  opinion  of  Jephet's  powers  as  a  commentator  held  by  M.  Barges 
(who  has  done  more  than  any  one  to  make  them  accessible)  is  perhaps 
too  high.  His  knowledge  of  both  Hebrew  ^  and  Chaldee  *  is  inaccurate, 
although  he  speaks  contemptuously  of  those  '  who  do  not  know  our 
language.'  The  grammatical  observations,  which  have  won  praise  from 
Neubauer^  and  others,  fail  almost  entirely  in  this  book^  His  ac- 
quaintance with  contemporary  events'^,  by  the  light  of  which  he  occa- 
sionally interprets  prophecy,  is  as  hazy  as  his  knowledge  of  earlier  history 


on  p.  75  sqq.  of  the  Bodleian  Commentary;  in  which  it  is  shewn  that  there  are 
four  possible  explanations  of  the  '  time,  times  and  a  half,'  which  all  alike  produce 
the  result  350  a.  h.  for  the  time  of  the  end. 

^  E.  g.  on  the  division  of  the  four  kingdoms  see  especially  the  note  on  ii.  33 
(MS.  p.  15b):  ijps  n  NTiptJ>  JU»  U  'Vjb.  ibji,  »ju*  L^J^  ^^J5CJ  ^\  il^l  JUi 
(^»^1  iSCUAl  [DHNJ]  L^Li-J  *.J  \ijiu^.  Some  'marvellous  inventions'  follow, 
by  which  the  'end'  is  fixed  for  350  a. h. — Compare  with  Jephet's  explanation  of 
Daniel's  exemption  from  bowing  down  to  the  statue  the  following  passage  (p.  26^) : 

"^  Perhaps  the  Arabic  Commentary  may  in  a  few  cases  be  supplemented  from 
the  spurious  work  printed  in  Buxtorf's  Bible  under  the  Gaon's  name ;  e.  g.  the 
opinion  refuted  on  p.  1.  8,  9  is  held  by  this  author.  See  Mathews,  Saadiah's  Comm. 
on  Ezra,  p.  xvi. 

^  See  especially  ix.  25  DTiyn  p1V3.  So  in  Is.  liii.  5  imapl  is  rendered  s^^Ll^, 
in  Ps.  xxii.  25  niJy  by  ijU.1,  etc. 

*  See  especially  ver.  12. 

^  Aus  der  Peter sburger  Btbltothek,  p.  15. 

*  Some  of  these  are  decidedly  striking;  see  Barg^.s'  Cant.  p.  xvii;  ibid.  p.  vo; 
Comm.  on  Exodus  (MS.  2467),  p.  126^:  jjwa-o  ^^.*  ij-i-U  yt,  "'n73'»  7^  u\  JlcI 

njJDB'  JJL*  JLs^  v_jUCJl  o^"  u^^'  ur*  b^^  U^yj  ^JT"^^   ^^^^P   ^^^^''  s-J^-^J 
IK  f*liu  A.ii.<.iji  A^^cJli. 

■^  E.  g.  the  history  of  the  Carmathians,  v.  supra. 


PREFACE.  ix 

is  shallow  ^.  On  the  other  hand,  the  present  Commentary  is  not  written 
currente  calaino,  for  the  theory  which  it  expresses  may  be  traced  even  in 
points  of  detail  in  his  earlier  writings.  Thus  the  argument  of  p.  ri.  i8  is 
anticipated  in  the  Commentary  on  Exodus^;  that  of  p.  iro.  i  sqq.  in  the 
Commentary  on  Leviticus  ^ ;  while  the  curious  combination  of  the  pro- 
phecies of  Isaiah,  Joel,  and  Daniel  worked  out  especially  in  the  notes  on 
the  twelfth  chapter  is  to  be  found  already  stated  in  the  Commentaries  on 
the  first  two  Prophets,  and  in  part  in  that  on  the  Canticles. 

In  the  appended  Translation  brevity  especially  has  been  studied,  and 
with  the  same  end  the  Arabic  version  of  the  Hebrew  text  as  well  as  the 
table  of  contents  has  been  left  untranslated.  Where,  however,  Jephet's 
interpretation  differs  seriously  from  the  Revised  Version,  account  is  taken 
of  the  difference  either  in  the  lemmata  or  in  notes.  These  differences  are 
of  course  never  worth  a  moment's  consideration  ;  the  idea  of  elucidating 
the  Hebrew  vocabulary  from  his  native  Arabic  was  not  familiar  to 
Jephet  *. 

With  the  list  of  curious  words  occurring  in  this  volume  contained  in 
the  Glossary,  the  Editor  has  incorporated  some  occurring  in  the  printed 
works  of  the  same  author,  as  well  as  in  works  of  his  existing  in  MS.  in 
Oxford,  London,  and  Paris.  Of  course  this  collection  does  not  aim  at 
completeness,  but  in  some  respects  perhaps  it  may  be  found  of  interest. 
Most  of  these  words  are  not  explained  in  the  Lexicons  of  Freytag  and 
Dozy,  although  their  existence  will  be  found  to  be  sufificiently  certified ; 
the  source  of  several  is  Syriac  or  Persian,  while  a  few  are  Hebrew  words 
in  an  Arabic  dress.  That  Jephet  should  think  it  proper  to  attack  in  this 
rustic  dialect  the  classical  writings  of  R.  Saadia  Gaon  agrees  with  the 


^  So  he  makes  Alexander  come  from  Alexandria. — In  the  Comm.  on  Kings  he 
mentions  Kalilah  wa-Dimnah. 

2  MS.  2467,  p.  167b  s  MS.  2472,  pp.  80b,  8ia 

*  I  have  noted  the  following  cases:  Lev.  xiii.  25,  where  nnriQ  is  connected  with 
A.X.X*  as  against  the  derivation  from  nins;  n^v,  i  Kings  vii.  29,  !pL:  L^^;  Prov. 
iii.  13,  where  p''a''  is  rendered  ^pj. 

[11.3-] 


X  PREFACE. 

contempt  which  he  frequently  expresses  for  the  learning  of  the  Gentiles. 
Many  of  the  words  recur  in  the  Lexicon  of  the  Karaite  David  b.  Abraham^ 

Matter  has  been  drawn  from  the  following  printed  books  :  BARGiiS' 
Specimen  ('Spec.'),  containing  the  Preface  to  the  Commentary  on  the 
Psalms,  with  version  and  explanation  of  Pss.  i  and  ii ;  BARGi:s'  edition  of 
the  complete  version  of  the  Psalms,  and  his  edition  of  the  Commentary 
on  the  Canticles ;  Hoffmann's  edition  of  the  Commentary  on  Ps.  xxii ; 
Auerbach's  of  that  on  Prov.  xxx  ;  Neubauer's  of  that  on  Isaiah  liii  2. 
A  MS.  of  the  complete  Commentary  on  Isaiah  was  kindly  lent  to  the 
Editor  by  Canon  Driver.  He  has  further  excerpted  the  fragmentary 
Commentary  on  the  Minor  Prophets  in  the  Bodleian  Library ;  that  on 
the  Proverbs  in  the  Biblioth^que  Nationale  in  Paris ;  and  a  portion  of 
the  rich  Schapira  Collection  in  the  British  Museum,  quoted  by  their 
number  in  the  Oriental  Catalogued 

My  best  thanks  are  due  to  the  Delegates  of  the  Press  for  undertaking 
this  work,  which  I  wish  I  could  have  accomplished  in  a  more  satisfactory 
manner;  to  Dr.  Neubauer,  for  multifarious  help  and  kindness;  and 
to  Mr.  J.  C.  Pembrey,  to  whose  care  and  skill  any  degree  of  accuracy 
which  mav  have  been  attained  is  to  be  ascribed. 


^  MS.  Bodl.  1451. 

^  In  The  Jewish  Interpreters  on  Isaiah  liii  by  Neubauer  and  Driver. 

'  To  the  literature  on  Jephet  must  now  be  added  Dr.  Hoerning's  accurate  and 
valuable  account  of  the  British  Museum  Karaite  MSS.,  which  appeared  too  late 
for  the  Editor  to  use. 


LIST  OF  MSS.  OF  THE  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL. 


M  =  Or.  2557  of  British  Museum. 

M^  =  Or.  2556  of  British  Museum. 
Both  these  fragments  are  in  the  Arabic  character,  containing  the  Hebrew  text  (also  in 
Arabic  characters)  with  vowel-points  and  accents.      The  portions  of  the  text  which  are 
found  in  these  fragments  are  marked  by  the  letters  M  and  M^  on  the  margin. 

B  =  0pp.  Add.   4°.  166   of  Bodleian   Library.     (See   Neubauer,    Catalogue, 
no.  2494.) 

P  =  2nd  Firkovich  Collection,  420  of  Imperial  Library,  St.  Petersburg. 

X  =  Firkovich  Collection,  580  of  Imperial  Library,  St.  Petersburg. 
All  these  are  in  the  Hebrew  character  and  (except  P)  complete.     Where  M  and  M' 
fail,  the  printed  text  follows  X,  unless  the  contrary  is  stated  in  the  note. 

D  =  2nd  Firkovich  Collection,  314. 
Fragments  covering  about  half  the  work ;   some  of  the  leaves  have  been  misplaced  by 
the  binder. 

K  =  2nd  Firkovich  Collection,  315. 
Commences  with  Hebrew  of  i,  6.      Wants  a  whole  sheet  (ten  leaves)  from  vii.  I  to 
vii.  25.    Also  defective  from  p.  iro.  15  to  p.  irt.  8.     Terminates  at  Comm.  on  xii.  II. 

Q  =  2nd  Firkovich  Collection,  313.     Large  fragments. 

Kit.  =  Last  part  of  cylx*:^*]!  jjliJ ,  containing  Commentary  on  chap.  xii.  (ending 
at  p.  101.  17). 

C  =  Or.  2520  of  British  Museum,  containing  six  short  fragments. 
All  these  are  in  the  Hebrew  character. 

The  MSS.  in  the  Hebrew  character  (Heb.)  were  all  copied  from  one  archetype,  as 
is  shewn  e.  g.  by  their  common  omission  of  the  translation  of  chap.  viii.  vers.  23  and  25, 
preserved  in  M ;  the  occasion  of  that  omission  is  obvious.  That  archetype  was  in  the 
Arabic  character,  as  is  shewn  by  the  nature  of  the  mistakes;  see  p.  1,  n.  i.  It  con- 
tained moreover  the  Hebrew  text  written  in  Arabic  characters,  for  from  the  nature  of 
the  transliteration  many  of  the  constant  errors  of  the  Karaitic  punctuation  can  be  ex- 
plained :  e.  g.  Qames  and  Segol  are  both  regularly  represented  by  the  Elif  of  lengthen- 
ing, and  Pathah  is  occasionally  represented  by  the  same ;  now  it  is  in  the  confusion  of 
these  three  signs  that  the  Hebrew  texts  in  these  MSS.  err  most^  To  the  same  source 
may  be  attributed  such  orthographies  as  D"'^D3  for  DHtJ'a.    That  archetype  cannot 


•  Barges,  in  his  edition  of  the  Canticles,  reproduces  the  Karaitic  pointing.  See*his  observa- 
tions, p.  XV.  The  MS.  copied  by  him  is  now  no  longer  '  unicum,'  since  the  introduction  of  the 
Schapira  Collection  into  the  British  Museum. 

*  a  2 


xii  .  LIST  OF  MSS. 

have  been  either  of  the  MSS.  of  which  M  and  M'^  are  fragments,  but  it  may  have  been 
not  earlier  than  these  MSS.,  which  date  probably  from  the  eleventh  century,  whereas  it 
is  not  probable  that  any  of  Heb.  are  earlier  than  the  fourteenth  (C  K  ?),  while  some 
(B  X  ?)  probably  belong  to  the  sixteenth.  The  text  offered  by  D  P  Q  X  is  practically 
the  same  ;  while  all  have  many  errors  in  common,  they  supplement  each  other  in  single 
cases.  B  and  K  exhibit  a  rather  different  recension,  in  some  cases  agreeing  with  M 
against  the  others ;  both  however  are  interpolated,  B  notably  so,  e.  g.  in  the  translation 
of  ix.  25,  where  Jephet  rendered  DTiyn  p1V31  eyUj^l  ^^^s^'j,  connecting  pIV^  with  p^3} 
but  the  editor  of  B  rightly  corrected  ^j-^-iajj ,  making  the  comment  disagree  with  the 
text.  See  too  the  note  on  p.  <\<\.  The  scribe  who  copied  B  can  have  known  very  little 
Arabic  (see  note  on  p.  v),  and  this  MS.  is  so  defaced  by  omissions,  occasioned  ordina- 
rily by  homoeoteleuton,  repetitions,  and  other  errors  that  the  Editor  found  it  impossible 
to  publish  the  text  from  it.  By  the  kindness  of  the  Imperial  Russian  Government  and 
the  English  Foreign  Office  the  six  St.  Petersburg  MSS.  were  placed  in  the  Bodleian 
for  a  period  of  four  months  ;  during  which  the  Editor  had  time  to  collate  K  and  X 
twice,  and  the  rest  once  with  the  exception  of  Q,  which  he  occasionally  consulted.  The 
British  Museum  fragments,  when  identified,  helped  him  to  correct  a  number  of  difficult 
passages,  but  many  remain  with  which  he  has  been  unable  to  grapple  successfully. 
The  various  readings  are  quoted  fully  in  the  first  few  pages,  afterwards  only  when  the 
text  of  M,  M^,  and  X  is  deserted,  or  when  they  seemed  to  the  Editor  to  possess  some 
interest. 

In  the  matter  of  orthography  the  MSS.  exhibit  no  regularity  (e.g.  ''VO  and  NifO  are 
sometimes  to  be  found  in  the  same  line).  The  Editor  has  endeavoured  in  transliterating 
to  introduce  the  ordinary  orthography,  but  where  the  text  existed  in  Arabic  characters 
he  has  rarely  departed  from  the  MSS. 

In  the  treatment  of  the  vulgar  forms ^  the  editors  have  taken  different  lines  :  Neu- 
BAUER  prints  the  vulgar  forms  without  alteration;   BARGES  prints  the  correct  forms  in 


'  A  peculiar  form  is  the  3rd  person  plur.  perf.  masc.  in  ^j,  p.  1  >*• .  9,  n.  2  ;  compare  Ex.  xix.  8 
^jijLaJ,  Ex.  xxiii.  28  ^^IjJiJ  J  U^-^  ^^JJl.  Lagarde,  Materialien  zur  Kritik  u.  sw. 
des  Fentateuchs,  i.  v,  notices  forms  like  -^  ^  ',.\'-,-.'\  Ps.  xxxi.  i  for  v.:uJLJlX.Z«)l .  IJjJ  *J  (for 
l^hj)  MS.  2473  (Numbers),  p.  16'',  unless  it  be  a  mistake  of  the  copyist,  is  curious.  J^l  (for 
J^)  occurs  in  MS.  2475,  p.  25";  comp.  ^::>^1  for  .  - -^  *■  MS.  2478,  p.  12''.  Forms  like  l».<Jb 
(for  l^jb)  are  common:  MS.  2478,  p.  I2^1j.*--J.,  p.  iS*"  Lj^..  Prov.  ix.  15  (Nipb)  ^.j^-^JlxI 
is  strangely  faulty.     Prov.  xiii.  18  slil  iJ>%:>  xj-Jlk-^  (for  (_5rji=jji)  is  probably  a  copyist's 


error. 


Letters  regularly  interchanged  are  ^^  andb;  both  were  pronounced  asj,  which,  as  in  O^i, 
sometimes  written  for  them.     ^^  and  ^yj 
i.  1 1  ((jtf  for  (_p)  is  unusual. — The  \  of  fore 
for  UI&.,  nj  for  (.i^*la.  Comm.  on  Ex.  xvi.  20. 


is  sometimes  written  for  them.     ^^  and  ^yj  are  occasionally  confused;     J.k,.aH  Cj*J«J  Prov. 
xiii.  1 1  (j^  for  j_p)  is  unusual. — The  \  of  forms  of  'La.  is  often  omitted  ;  13  is  commonly  written 


LIST  OF  MSS.  xiii 

the  text,  placing  the  vulgar  forms  in  the  notes  * ;  Auerbach  prints  the  vulgar  forms  in 
the  text,  followed  by  the  correct  forms  in  brackets.  The  first  of  these  seems  clearly  the 
right  method,  since  these  vulgar  forms  never  create  any  difficulty,  and  it  is  no  part  of 
the  editor's  duty  to  correct  the  author's  language.  On  the  advice  of  friends,  however, 
the  present  Editor  has  in  the  earlier  sheets  given  in  foot-notes  what  he  believes  to  be  the 
correct  substitutes  for  the  more  glaring  errors  in  the  text^. 

This  Commentary  is  excerpted  (in  Hebrew)  in  the  IB^yn  ISD,  a  specimen  of  which 
is  given  by  Pinsker,  1.  c.  p.  88.  Jephet  is  frequently  quoted  by  Ibn  Ezra,  but,  as  else- 
where, the  quotations  do  not  correspond  with  the  Arabic  originals.  On  the  other  hand,  an 
opinion  attributed  to  D^■'"nV  ''D3n  '  Sadducean  Doctors,'  i.  e.  Karaites,  on  chap,  xi,  will 
be  found  stated  in  full  in  the  accompanying  text :   Ht  l{J>TaK>  D''p'nv  ""ODnD  moni'  ^ 

:  D^!'y»K'NT  n^^y  win^K'  (Mekka)  na^D  N^n  ^i^ipi^n  ^a  ncNi  ^^nvb. 


^  Not,  however,  consistently;  e.g.  he  allows  the  Comm.  on  Canticles  to  commence  nn^ttjJ  ^J\ 
^jLjLc  for  ^J-*-JLc. 

*  The  following  signs  have  been  employed  in  the  text : 
^  )  denote  insertions  by  the  Editor. 
[  ]  denote  interpolations. 
(  )  denote  alternative  renderings. 
References  to  the  Old  Testament  are  given  on  the  margin ;  the  quotations  have  been  abridged  as 
much  as  possible. 


ENGLISH    TRANSLATION. 


COMMENTARY  ON    DANIEL. 


The  book  of  Daniel.  This  book  has  been  attributed  to  Daniel  in  particular 
because  it  contains  an  account  of  his  history  and  prophecy.  It  comprises  eleven 
chapters. 

If  we  add  up  the  years  occupied  by  this  book,  they  make  up  a  total  of  sixty-seven  : 
[for  seventy  years  were  occupied  by  the  reigns  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  Evil-Merodach,  and 
Belshazzar ;  all  of  which  come  within  our  narrative,  except  the  first  seven  years  of 
Nebuchadnezzar,  as  we  shall  see  below ;]  this  leaves  sixty-three  years,  to  which  are  to 
be  added  the  one  year  of  Darius  and  the  three  years  of  Cyrus  ;  making  a  total  of 
sixty-seven  years. 

I. 

I.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim  was  divided  into  three  parts  : 
a.  /our  years  during  which  he  was  subject  to  the  king  of  Egypt ;  b.  ikree  years  during 
which  he  was  subject  to  the  king  of  Babylon  (2  Kings  xxiv.  i) ;  [c.  f^ree  years  during 
which  he  was  independent.]  During  these  three  years  the  king  of  Babylon  was 
occupied  with  his  Eastern  expedition  ;  after  he  had  rested  a  little,  he  attacked  him  (in 
the  tenth  year  of  his  reign),  besieged  him  with  his  army,  took  his  city,  took  him 
prisoner,  and  carried  away  many  captives  with  part  of  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  God 
(see  here). 

In  the  third  year :  not  '  in  the  tenth  year,'  for  the  following  reason.  Jehoiakim 
had  originally  been  subject  to  the  king  of  Egypt ;  then  he  became  subject  to  the  king  of 
Babylon.  Thus  seven  years  passed ;  and  since  after  this  he  rebelled  against  the  king  of 
Babylon,  and  became  an  independent  king,  who  paid  homage  to  no  other,  the  writer 
can  say  z'n  the  third  year  of  the  reign  of Jehoiakitn  king  offudah,  dating  from  the  time 
at  which  he  became  independent.  The  proof  of  our  theory  of  the  division  of  Jehoiakim's 
reign  into  three  parts  is  the  statement  in  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  4,  that  the  king  of  Egypt 
took  Jehoahaz,  brother  of  Jehoiakim,  and  sent  him  to  Egypt,  and  made  Jehoiakim 
king  in  his  stead.  Now  we  know  that  he  remained  subject  to  the  king  of  Egypt  four 
years,  and  that  the  king  of  Babylon  came  to  the  throne  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim ; 
see  Jer.  xxv.  i,  where  it  is  stated  that  the  first  year  of  Nebuchadnezzar  was  the  fourth 
of  Jehoiakim.  In  that  year  the  king  of  Babylon  fought  with  the  army  of  the  king  of 
Egypt,  which  was  encamped  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  (see  Jer.  1.  c),  when  Syria 
fell  into  his  hands  (2  Kings  xxiv.  7),  and  Jehoiakim  became  subject  to  the  king  of 
Babylon  in  the  fifth  year  of  his  reign. 

Came  unto  Jerusalem  and  besieged  it :  he  was  not  satisfied  with  sending  an 
army  against  him,  but  led  the  army  himself.     Had  Jehoiakim  come  out  to  him,  he 

b  [II.  3.] 


3  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [1.2. 

would  not  have  besieged  the  city  ;  only  the  former  would  not  submit,  and  locked  the 
gates,  and  stood  a  siege,  thinking  that  the  king  of  Babylon  would  grow  tired  and 
desist.     The  king,  however,  maintained  the  siege  until  he  took  the  city. 

2.  Either  he  stormed  the  city,  as  some  think,  or  the  people  may  have  opened  the 
gates.  The  latter  is  the  more  likely,  as  no  battle  is  mentioned.  Jehoiakim,  we  are 
told,  died  outside  Jerusalem.  Either  the  king  of  Babylon  tormented  him  till  he  died, 
or  he  was  killed  [in  some  other  way]  ;  or  he  may  have  killed  himself. 

And  he  carried  them  into  the  land  of  Shinar  :  i.  e.  rather  more  than  three 
thousand  men  whom  the  king  of  Babylon  carried  away  captive  ;  they  are  mentioned  in 
Jer.  lii.  28.  He  brought  the  vessels  into  the  treasure-house  of  his  god  :  observe 
that  we  are  not  told  the  Jiuviber  of  the  vessels,  nor  their  material  (gold,  silver,  or  brass) ; 
doubtless  they  were  different  vessels  from  those  taken  away  with  Jehoiakim  (2  Chron. 
xxxvi.  10) ;  they  were  not  used  by  him,  but  put  all  together  in  a  safe  place  ;  had  he 
attempted  to  use  them,  God  would  not  have  permitted  it,  even  as  He  did  not  permit 
Belshazzar,  but  shewed  serious  signs  [of  His  disapproval]. 

3,  4.  He  ordered  the  chief  of  his  ministers,  under  whose  care  the  captive  Israelites 
were,  to  choose  from  the  whole  multitude  youths  of  this  description  without  fixing 
a  number ;  he  was  to  look  out  for  all  who  were  possessed  of  these  characteristics,  and 
to  take  them,  however  few  or  many  of  them  there  might  be. 

Of  the  children  of  Israel :  i.  e.  of  those  who  were  not  of  the  royal  stock,  or  of  the 
children  of  the  nobles,  but  of  the  cotnmon  people.  He  did  not  regard  the  fact  of  such 
a  person  being  of  the  common  people,  when  found  to  possess  these  qualities  ;  to  shew 
that  talented  persons  are  not  affected  by  the  lowness  of  their  station. 

And  he  ordered  him  to  take  the  best  looking  of  them;  it  would  not  be  seemly  that  a 
person  with  uncomely  visage  should  stand  in  his  court ;  such  persons  must  have 
handsome  features,  and  be  comely  and  fair. 

Of  understanding  in  all  ■wisdom  :  not  wisdom  in  the  Thora  concerning 
'unclean'  and  'clean,'  or  sacrifices,  as  the  king  would  not  desire  that.  He  rather 
desired  persons  of  intelligence  in  all  subjects  into  which  intellect  can  enter,  and 
studies  connected  therewith. 

And  knowing  knowledge :  most  probably  knowledge,  like  Solomon's,  in  the 
different  departments  of  philosophy.  The  children  of  Israel  were  never  destitute 
of  its  elements,  but  always  taught  them  to  their  children.  Even  in  the  times  of 
their  idolatry  and  wickedness,  the  votaries  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  never  failed 
among  them. 

And  understanding  teaching  :  knowing  the  way  to  instruct  others  in  their 
knowledge ;  not  every  scholar  makes  a  good  teacher. 

So  he  chose  all  those  in  whom  were  all  these  virtues  and  desirable  qualities.  Since 
this  was  done  at  the  time  described,  it  was  unlikely  that  there  would  be  [many]  lads 
among  them  possessing  these  qualities. 

And  such  as  had  ability :  i.  e.  force  of  patience  to  stand  before  the  king,  and 
to  abstain  from  expectorating,  spitting,  etc. 


1.9,]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL,  3 

And  he  ordered  them  to  be  taught  the  writing  and  language  :  that  they  might 
write  it  and  talk  it ;  naturally  they  would  not  know  either. 

Had  not  Ashpenaz  himself  possessed  many  of  these  gifts  and  understood  them, 
the  king  would  not  have  given  him  this  order. 

The  king's  object  in  taking  these  youths,  so  described,  was  twofold  :  (l)  to  gratify 
his  fancy  for  men  of  knowledge ;  for  it  is  the  custom  of  high-minded  kings  to  have 
scholars  trained  in  their  courts  ;  (2)  to  be  able  to  boast  before  the  nations  that  in  his 
court  are  the  greatest  men  in  the  world. 

5.  It  was  not  the  king's  purpose  to  corrupt  their  religion,  as  he  eftdeavoured  to  do 
in  the  story  of  the  image  which  he  set  up ;  he  rather  desired  that  they  should 
have  suitable  diet,  which  would  make  them  grow,  and  give  them  a  healthy  appear- 
ance. So  he  made  their  rations  like  his  own  food  and  drink ;  the  best  food  and 
the  choicest  drink. 

He  also  designed  that  he  should  train  them  three  years,  that  they  might  come 
before  the  king  fair  in  form  and  appearance,  and  acquainted  with  the  writing  and 
language  and  all  that  was  desired  of  them. 

6.  These  four  are  mentioned  on  account  of  their  abstaining  from  the  king's  food, 
and  the  rest  of  their  achievements.  Among  them  were  some  of  the  seed-royal,  whom 
the  Scripture  does  not  mention.  Had  these  four  been  of  it,  he  would  have  said,  '  there 
were  among  them  of  the  seed-royal,'  mentioning  their  rank.  This  disproves  the  view 
that  Is.  xxxix.  2  refers  to  these. 

7.  He  surnamed  them  with  Chaldean  names ;  possibly  names  of  honour,  since 
Belteshazzar  is  the  name  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  God  {inf.  iv.  5) ;  the  rest  may  be 
so  too. 

8.  He  bound  himself  not  to  eat  the  king's  food  or  drink  his  drink,  whatever  the 
consequences  might  be ;  staking  his  life,  just  as  he  staked  it  in  his  prayer,  and  as 
Hananiah,  Mishael,  and  Azariah  staked  theirs  when  they  would  not  bow  down  to  the 
image.  It  is  quite  impossible  that  he  would  have  staked  it  for  a  matter  of  no 
consequence  as  some  irreligious  persons  have  said,  whom  we  have  answered  in  our 
commentary  on  the  commandment. 

He  would  not  defile  himself:  not,  '  he  would  not  eat ;'  meaning  that  he  would 
not  eat  a  meat  originally  pure,  but  defiled  by  [coming  in  contact  with]  uncleanness. 
And  he  made  no  difference  between  the  meat  (consisting  of  animals  slaughtered  by 
Gentiles)  and  the  drink.  Possibly  the  former  was  not  from  an  animal  naturally 
forbidden,  nor  the  wine  naturally  forbidden ;  but  only  because  it  was  prepared  by 
Gentiles,  though  free  from  all  taint  of  uncleanness.  This  was  because  he  regarded  the 
grape-juice  as  the  original  state  [i.e.  he  regarded  the  wine  as  a  transformation  of 
grape-juice],  and  refused  to  touch  that  with  which  uncleanness  was  mingled* 

The  chief  of  the  eunuchs  is  Ashpenaz.  He  said,  '  My  lord,  give  me  not,  I  pray 
thee,  food  and  drink  which  will  not  profit  me.'  But  the  other  gave  him  an  answer 
which  took  from  him  all  hope  that  his  request  would  be  granted  him. 

9.  Favour  and  compassion  comprise  two  periods  ;  the  first,  sc.  favour,  had  been 

b  2 


4  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [i.  lo. 

shewn  in  the  previous  time,  and  consisted  in  various  acts  of  kindness  shewn  to  Daniel 
which  he  does  not  describe  at  length ;  the  second,  compassion^  took  place  at  that 
particular  time,  consisting  in  his  doing  him  no  harm  or  violence,  nor  informing  the 
king,  but  excusing  himself  as  follows. 

ID.  He  tells  him  that  he  only  refuses  out  of  fear  for  his  life,  whenever  the 
king  should  send  for  them,  wishing  to  observe  their  condition  ;  and  if  he  saw  the 
faces  of  the  others  and  saw  their  faces  different,  when  on  enquiring  he  found  out 
about  the  change  in  their  food,  the  blame  would  fall  on  Ashpenaz,  while  they  would 
not  be  reprehended. 

According  to  your  joy :  because  the  wise  are  habitually  joyous  and  merry, 
because  knowledge  wastes  the  body  and  destroys  it. 

DniTIj  like  3in  in  Ezek.  xviii.  7. 

11.  As  the  chief  eunuch  would  not  grant  his  request,  and  he  had  bound  himself 
to  stake  his  life  upon  it,  he  tried  the  expedient  of  speaking  to  the  man  through  whose 
hands  this  nourishment  passed,  in  case  he  might  do  this  for  them,  and  try  them,  as  we 
shall  explain  presently. 

12.  Try  us  ten  days.  A  short  time,  of  which  account  is  scarcely  taken  ordi- 
narily; in  order  to  facilitate  the  matter,  and  render  its  accomplishment  less 
arduous. 

13, 14.  He  accepted  their  proposal  and  afterwards  examined  them,  and  found  them 
fatter  and  fairer  than  the  others  who  had  been  eating  the  king's  food  and  drinking  his 
wine.  This  must  have  been  done  by  the  Creator,  who  set  in  the  grain  something 
to  supply  the  place  of  meat,  and  similarly  in  the  water.  Those  who  did  not  do  as 
Daniel  and  his  friends  must  either  have  argued  that  they  were  excused  and  that  it  was 
impossible  for  them  to  resist  the  Sultan,  or  they  did  so  because  they  did  not  care 
about  lawful  and  unlawful.  And  God  sent  leanness  into  their  bodies,  so  that  they  did 
not  fatten.  This  proves  that  God  cares  for  His  saints  who  are  willing  to  suffer  death 
for  His  law's  sake. 

At  the  end  of  ten  days,  when  he  found  that  they  were  increased  in  fairness 
and  fatness,  he  continued  this  for  a  period  of  three  years. 

16.  He  profited  by  the  provisions  and  took  them  for  himself,  without  telling 
Ashpenaz,  but  doing  it  in  secret. 

33ns  includes  bread  and  dainties.  The  word  may  be  divided  into  two :  DD 
'  bread,'  and  33  *  dainties,'  i.  e.  bread  and  meat.    Pulse  is  the  substitute  for  it. 

They  took  wheat  for  bread,  and  some  other  grain  to  cook,  such  as  lentils,  rice, 
pease,  and  beans,  and  they  drank  water.  Of  course  they  took  grain  that  was  not 
defiled ;  and  water  out  of  the  river  in  clean  vessels,  as  they  wished. 

17.  They  had  already  the  wisdom  described  above  ;  which  God  Almighty  increased 
during  these  days  with  additional  wisdom,  in  all  book-learning  and  philosophy  known 
by  the  sages  and  Chaldees.  Daniel  surpassed  them  by  the  possession  of  certain 
divine  gifts,  such  as  the  interpretation  of  all  visions.  The  Chaldees  did  not 
understand  dreams.     This  was  not  confined  to  Daniel,  since  Hananiah  and  the  rest 


II.  I.]  -  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  5 

were  distinguished,  only  Daniel  was  the  most  eminent.  This  was  all  the  Creator's 
purpose  (he  gave  them),  compare  inf.  ii.  21  and  Prov.  xx.  6. 

18.  At  the  end  of  the  three  years,  during  which  the  king  had  ordained  that  they 
should  be  nourished  and  instructed  in  the  *  writing  and  language,'  the  Chief  of  the 
Eunuchs  brought  them  before  him,  and  the  king  began  to  examine  them  in  the 
different  departments  of  science,  and  found  none  among  the  Jewish  youths  like  them 
(all  of  them  refers  to  the  Jews).  This  was  owing  to  what  was  mentioned  before — 
God's  bestowing  on  them  clear  intelligences.  Next  he  tells  us  that  they  were  ten 
times  better  than  the  king's  sages.  Either  this  is  a  [figure  of  speech  or  else  a]  real 
number,  and  we  are  to  infer  that  the  king  called  all  his  sages  before  him  in  their  presence, 
and  bade  them  ask  one  another  questions,  while  he  heard  what  passed  between  them  on 
each  particular  head  ;  and  doubtless  he  himself  was  a  sage  and  understood  the  discourse, 
and  comprehended  what  passed  and  how  they  surpassed  all  his  sages  ten  times  in  breadth 
of  knowledge :  and  perhaps  there  were  among  his  sages  men  who  had  been  studying 
science  all  their  lives  till  they  had  grown  old,  who  yet  had  not  reached  the  stage 
of  these  four.  All  this  was  in  order  that  God  might  exalt  His  servants  who  were  sunk 
to  the  lowest  depth,  and  because  they  had  clung  to  His  religion  and  had  not  indulged 
themselves  with  eating  unlawful  food,  but  had  eaten  grain  instead.  And  among  the 
philosophers  there  must  have  arisen  mutterings  against  certain  meats,  'Woe  to  him 
that  eats  defiled  food  and  the  preparation  of  the  Gentiles,  defihng  his  soul  and 
removing  it  from  holiness,  and  withdrawing  it  from  God  Almighty ;  who  finds  ways 
of  explaining  away  the  commandments,  and  eats  forbidden  foods,  and  drinks  the 
Gentile  drinks,  with  creeping  things  and  abominations  among  them.'  And  there  is  no 
difference  between  wine  and  any  other  drink,  all  of  them  being  mashqiym.  And  no 
person  during  the  Captivity  can  possibly  eat  the  preparation  of  any  one  whom  he 
knows  to  be  unfaithful  in  his  observances  in  the  matter  of  preparation  of  meats, 
so  that  his  food  is  of  the  unclean  and  impure.  •  Such  cases  are  referred  to  in  Lev. 
XX.  25  and  Ps.  xxxiv,  10, 

21.  Was:  i.e.  was  in  the  Sultan's  kingdom  till  the  first  year  of  Cyrus,  the  time 
when  the  Israelites  were  set  free  to  go  to  the  Holy  Land  to  build  the  Temple ;  when  he 
was  set  free  from  the  duties  of  government  and  retired  into  rehgious  life.  He  had  by 
then  grown  old.  As  for  his  companions,  he  tells  us  nothing  about  them  after  the  story 
of  the  image. 

n. 

I.  Just  as  we  said  of  the  'third  year  of  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim  '  that  the  phrase  did 
not  refer  to  his  reign  literally,  so  this  again  does  not  refer  to  Nebuchadnezzar's  reign, 
as  Daniel  is  the  person  who  interpreted  the  dream.  Plainly  it  must  refer  to  something 
else.  Some  have  supposed  it  to  be  the  second  year  of  Jehoiakim^  s  captivity,  which  is 
unlikely,  because  Daniel  had  no  office  till  after  three  years ;  see  i.  5,  which  shews 
that  he  licensed  them  after  three  years.  Others  have  referred  it  to  the  fall  of 
Jerusalem,  imagining  that  he  did  not  consider  himself  king  till  he  had  subdued  Israel ; 


6  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [ii.  2. 

which  is  not  improbable.  To  my  mind  what  is  most  probable  is  that  it  means  [the 
second  year]  after  he  had  become  king  of  the  entire  world  {inf.  ii.  38).  Now  it  is  well 
known  that  he  took  Jerusalem  before  he  took  Tyre  :  and  Tyre  before  he  took  Egypt. 
It  is  most  probable  that  he  took  Egypt  in  the  thirtieth  year  of  his  reign.  This  is 
shewn  by  Ezek.  xxix.  ii,  '  neither  shall  it  be  inhabited  forty  years,'  etc.  (cp.  13).  Now 
it  was  God's  decree  concerning  the  whole  of  the  captives  that  they  should  remain  in 
their  present  condition  the  whole  seventy  years,  made  up  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  his  son, 
and  his  son's  son  (Jer.  xxv.  11)  ;  none  of  them  returning  to  his  country  till  after  the 
completion  of  these  seventy  years.  Now  Egypt  was  the  last  of  his  conquests,  as  no 
other  king  stood  before  him  save  Pharaoh ;  so  that  the  words  in  the  second,  year  will  refer 
to  the  thirty-second  year  of  his  reign,  thirteen  years  after  the  destruction  of  the  Temple. 
In  that  year  Ezekiel  saw  the  form  of  the  Temple  (xl.  i)  ;  for  Nebuchadnezzar  took 
the  Holy  City  and  burnt  the  Temple  in  the  seventeenth  year  of  his  reign  ;  and  if 
Nebuchadnezzar  saw  the  dream  in  the  thirty-second  year  of  his  reign,  there  must  have 
passed  since  the  destruction  of  the  Temple  thirteen  years,  and  the  appearance  of  the 
dream  will  have  taken  place  in  the  fourteenth  year  [after  its  destruction]. 

Dreamed  dreams.  There  was  only  one.  Our  view  of  this  phrase  is  that  he  says 
dreams  because  the  dream  contains  five  subjects  ;  i.e.  it  embraces  the  account  of  four 
kingdoms  and  of  the  empire  of  Israel.  The  same  expression  is  used  of  Joseph's  dream 
(Gen.  xxxvii.  7),  before  he  saw  the  second  dream,  and  that  again  is  because  the  first 
dream  contained  three  subjects. 

His  spirit  was  troubled,  because  he  awoke  and  forgot  the  dream,  and  tried 
to  remember  what  he  had  seen,  but  could  not  remember  at  all.  Then  he  slept  again ; 
his  sleep  was  upon  him. 

Note  that  there  is  a  difference  between  the  dream  of  Pharaoh  and  that  of 
Nebuchadnezzar,  in  two  respects  :  I.  Pharaoh  saw  his  dream  at  the  end  of  the  night 
(Gen.  xli.  8),  whereas  Nebuchadnezzar  saw  his  in  the  middle  of  the  night  (his  sleep 
was  upon  him) ;  2.  Pharaoh  remembered  his  dream,  whereas  Nebuchadnezzar 
forgot  his.  The  reason  of  this  was  that  Pharaoh's  dream  was  realized  after  a  short 
time,  whereas  Nebuchadnezzar's  is  not  yet  fully  realized.  Consequently,  as  the 
former's  dream  was  realized  after  a  short  interval,  God  Almighty  did  not  suffer  him  to 
forget  it ;  but  as  Nebuchadnezzar's  was  not  to  be  realized  till  after  a  long  period,  God 
caused  him  to  forget  it,  so  that  when  the  dream  was  told  him,  that  might  be  evidence 
of  the  correctness  of  its  interpretation. 

2.  These  Chaldeans  had  a  certain  wisdom  which  they  professed.  There  was  left 
no  order  professing  to  reveal  secrets,  which  he  did  not  summon,  demanding  that  they 
should  tell  him  the  dream  which  he  had  forgotten. 

3.  He  desired  them  to  tell  him  the  dream  (see  ver.  2). 

4.  Possibly  he  spoke  to  them  first  in  some  other  language  than  the  Aramaic, 
but  afterwards  addressed  them  in  Aramaic,  as  they  addressed  him.  Then  they  said  : 
Tell  thou  the  dream  that  we  may  tell  the  interpretation  thereof.  They  did  not  say, 
*  We  cannot  tell  thee  the  dream.' 


II.  JO.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  7 

5.  He  said,  'First  I  asked  you  for  the  dream;  but,  as  you  are  not  satisfied  with 
that,  I  ask  you  now  for  the  dream  and  the  interpretation  thereof.  And  if  ye 
will  not  shew  me  the  dream  and  the  interpretation  thereof,  ye  shall  be  hewed  in 
pieces,  i.  e.  your  flesh  shall  be  cut  up,  and  your  houses  become  confiscate  to  the 
Sultan. 

6.  '  But,  if  you  shew  me  the  dream  and  the  interpretation  thereof,  I  will  give  you 
raiment  and  dinars,  and  handsome  presents,  and  high  honours  shall  be  bestowed  upon 
you  ;  but  only  after  you  have  told  me  the  dream  and  its  interpretation.' 

When  they  heard  his  promise  and  his  threat,  and  could  find  no  deliverer,  they 
repeated  their  speech  a  second  time  like  the  first,  as  follows. 

7.  *We  stand  by  our  first  answer;  we  undertake  to  interpret  it.'  Again  they 
would  not  say  'We  cannot  tell  thee  the  dream.'  When  he  saw  them  .  .  .,  he  first 
demanded  of  them  the  dream  without  promising  them  or  threatening  them  ;  .  .  .  after- 
wards, he  demanded  of  them  the  dream  and  the  interpretation  thereof,  and  made  them 
a  promise.  When  they  repeated  their  answer  about  the  interpretation,  instead  of 
saying  '  We  are  unable,'  he  said  to  them  something  different. 

8.  9.  Ye  are  buying  the  time  :  i.  e.  you  are  making  the  time  pass,  and  imagine 
that  I  will  refrain  from  asking  you,  and  that  you  will  leave  me  troubled  in  thought,  with 
my  spirit  distressed,  while  you  care  not.     This  is  because  you  see  that  the  dream  has 

fled  from  me  and  that  I  cannot  remember  it. 

There  is  but  one  law  for  you  :  i.  e.  one  judgment ;  I  will  make  no  difference 
between  you  ;  let  no  one  imagine  that  I  will  spare  you  or  any  one  of  you.  Others 
interpret :  Ye  are  all  agreed  on  one  thing,  i.  e.  to  say,  '  Tell  us  the  dream,  and  we  will 
interpret  it,'  and  not  to  tell  me  the  dream. 

Lying  and  corrupt  words  :  i.  e.  if  ye  do  not  tell  me  the  dream,  then  ye  will  not 
tell  me  its  interpretation  either.  Ye  only  say  'We  will  interpret  the  dream'  to  shift 
till  the  time  is  changed,  i.  e.  till  that  with  which  ye  are  threatened  is  removed  from 
you.  Tell  me  the  dream  :  and  when  ye  have  told  it  I  shall  know  thereby  that  ye  will 
tell  the  interpretation  thereof. 

The  word  DDJDTjn  is  from  the  root  pT,  the  letter  1  being  servile.  He  means, 
'  You  have  made  this  time  different  to  that  wherein  you  used  to  tell  us  that  you 
understood  secrets.'  Nebuchadnezzar  must  have  heard  them  say  that  they  understood 
things  of  this  sort ;  otherwise  he  would  not  have  demanded  it  of  them,  nor  would 
he  have  killed  them  except  because  before  this  time  they  had  professed  this  ;  but  now, 
when  his  demand  had  fallen  upon  them,  and  they  saw  no  way  to  meet  it,  they  said 
time  after  time,  '  Tell  the  dream  that  we  may  interpret  it,'  instead  of  saying  '  We  are 
not  equal  to  this  ;'  and  simply  maintained  that  he  knew  the  dream  and  was 
demanding  of  them  what  he  remembered,  or  that  he  had  seen  no  dream  at  all,  and 
was  demanding  of  them  what  he  had  not  seen.  This  is  why  he  said  lying  and 
corrupt  words.  And  when  they  heard  this  last  word  they  were  forced  to  declare 
they  had  lied  when  they  professed  that  they  could  reveal  secrets. 

10.   Note  that   none  of  them  ventured  to  address  the  king  save  the  Chaldees, 


8  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [II,  ii, 

who  were  the  nearest  to  the  king  of  them  all,  and  spoke  for  the  rest.  They  said, 
*  O  king,  we  will  tell  thee  the  truth.  Do  not  think  that  any  man  can  reveal  this  secret, 
we  or  any  beside  us,  neither  busy  thy  heart  with  any  such  fancy,  nor  ask  of  us  an 
impossibility,  nor  imagine  of  us  that  we  understand  any  such  thing,  or  that  we  are 
trying  to  protract  the  time  while  thy  spirit  is  tormented.  So  spare  us  in  justice.  Has 
any  of  the  kings  that  preceded  thee  ever  demanded  of  his  sages  this  thing  which  thou 
demandest  of  us  ? ' 

11.  Appended  explanation.  And  there  is  none  other  :  it  is  clear  to  me  that  they 
aimed  at  Daniel  and  his  fellows  as  professing  such  knowledge ;  then  they  relegate 
[the  king]  to  the  angels.  Hence,  in  ver.  lo,  there  is  no  man  on  the  dry  land 
(with  reference  to  the  Jewish  sages)  ;  here,  none  but  the  angels  know  this.  *  So 
be  just  to  us  and  demand  not  of  us  an  impossibility.' 

12.  When  he  saw  that  they  dealt  plainly  with  him  and  gave  him  no  hope,  he  was 
wroth,  and  ordered  the  slaughter  of  all  of  them  that  were  present  in  Babylon,  and  that 
others  who  were  dispersed  outside  Babylon  should  be  brought  before  him,  after 
the  slaughter  of  these,  that  he  might  hear  what  they  had  to  say.  The  words,  and 
they  sought  Daniel  and  his  comrades,  point  to  the  fact  that  they  had  not  been 
present  with  them  during  the  colloquy  which  passed  between  the  Chaldees  and  the 
king  ;  and  this  was  because  they  had  never  professed  that  they  understood  mysteries 
as  these  had  professed  ;  only  the  wise  men  of  Babylon  must  have  said,  '  We  and  others 
are  partners  in  taking  the  king's  supplies  ;  why  should  we  be  killed  and  not  they  ?  Let 
them  be  killed  too.'  And  when  the  news  reached  Daniel,  he  hastened  and  came 
before  the  king's  executioner  so  that  he  learned  the  matter  from  him,  and  went  before 
the  king  and  asked  of  him  a  respite,  and  promised  him  what  he  had  asked  of  the 
wise  men. 

14,  15.  pN  comes  from  TN  like  pN  p)  (Ezra  v.  16) ;    HCy  comes  from  HVy. 

nDVnrtD  (it  is  said)  is  from  the  language  of  the  Pharisees,  in  which  the  insolent  is 
called  NQ''Vn.  He  tells  us  that  Daniel  referred  the  counsel  and  the  guidance  to 
Arioch,  after  he  had  asked  him  to  explain  the  matter  clearly ;  and  he  took  his  advice 
and  his  bidding  about  the  question,  whether  he  should  enter  unto  the  king  and 
ask  him  for  a  respite,  or  should  not  enter  unto  him  for  fear  of  the  Sultan's  wrath  and 
lest  he  might  not  give  him  time,  but  order  him  to  be  slain.  And  Arioch,  knowing 
that  the  king  would  give  him  time  and  would  not  deal  hastily  with  him,  counselled 
him  to  enter  unto  him.  Perhaps  he  asked  permission  for  him,  so  that  he  might 
enter  in  and  ask  him  for  the  respite,  and  the  king  answered  him  favourably.  The 
executioner  had  been  executing  the  wise  men  of  Babel  one  after  another ;  and  perhaps 
had  begun  with  the  most  honourable. 

16.  An  interpretation  :  plainly  not  without  the  dream;  for  the  person  who  did 
not  know  the  dream  could  not  possibly  interpret  it.  He  could  only  interpret  when  he 
knew  both  dream  and  interpretation.  Daniel  must  have  promised  the  king  what  he 
had  demanded  of  the  wise  men,  both  dream  and  interpretation  ;  and  he  did  so  because 
it  was  plain  to  him,  and  he  was  convinced  and  assured  that  Almighty  God  had  made 


II.  20.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  9 

him  forget  the  dream  in  order  that  He  might  prove  the  wise  men  of  Babylon  liars  in 
their  professions,  and  reveal  the  matter  to  Daniel,  that  he  might  magnify  his  people 
who  serve  the  True  God,  Who  alone  sheweth  dreams  and  revealeth  secrets. 

17.  I.e.  he  told  them  the  cause  of  the  massacre  and  what  he  had  promised 
the  king. 

18.  I.e.  the  four  stood  crying  to  God  and  begging  mercy  of  Him,  in  that  He 
would  reveal  this  secret,  that  they  might  not  be  killed  with  the  rest ;  for  they  knew 
that  they  would  not  be  left  while  the  others  were  killed,  especially  after  Daniel's 
promise  to  the  king. 

19.  As  there  was  no  use  in  the  revelation  of  the  mystery  to  all  four  of  them,  one  of 
them  sufficing,  He  revealed  it  to  Daniel,  who  was  the  principal  of  them,  especially 
as  the  king  had  not  demanded  that  ^11  the  wise  men  of  Babylon  should  shew  him  the 
dream,  but  if  one  told  him,  he  would  excuse  the  rest ;  do  you  not  see  that  Daniel  said 
to  the  executioner,  '  Destroy  not  the  wise  men  of  Babylon '  ?  Next  he  tells  us  that 
when  Almighty  God  had  revealed  it  unto  him,  he  blessed  God  for  that.  Evidently 
He  shewed  Daniel  the  dream  which  the  king  had  seen,  i.  e.  the  figure  of  the  image, 
and  the  cutting  of  the  stone  out  of  the  mountain,  and  the  breaking  of  the  image  and 
the  wind  carrying  away  its  dust,  and  how  the  stone  became  a  mighty  mountain. 

20  sqq.  Observe  that  he  tells  us  that  they  asked  of  Almighty  God  that  He  would 
reveal  the  mystery  to  them,  that  they  might  not  be  slain  like  the  rest  of  the  wise  men 
of  Babylon ;  and  he  tells  us  that  Daniel  thanked  Almighty  God  for  having  revealed 
the  mystery  to  him,  but  does  not  record  any  thanksgiving  by  him  for  their  deliverance 
from  death  ;  because  the  Glory  of  God  was  to  his  mind  more  important  than  the 
deliverance  of  their  souls ;  and  further,  if  the  mystery  were  revealed,  they  were  beyond 
doubt  delivered.  Then  he  thanked  Almighty  God  according  to  what  the  subject 
of  the  dream  suggested  ;  for  wisdom  and  might  are  His  :  as  He  had  furnished  him 
with  wisdom  which  no  one  else  had  mastered  (cp.  v.  23  a).  Now  he  ascribed  wisdom 
to  Him  in  one  of  two  senses :  either  he  meant,  '  He  is  the  wise  and  mighty;'  or  he 
meant,  *  He  giveth  wisdom  and  might  to  whom  He  will '  (compare  for  wisdom  Prov. 
ii.  6,  and  for  power  Deut.  viii.  18,  Is.  xl.  29).  He  changeth  the  seasons  and 
times:  seasons:  i.e.  seasons  of  the  year,  'cold,  heat,  summer,  and  winter;'  times: 
i.  e.  night  and  day.  No  one  can  do  this  save  the  Creator.  He  removeth  kings  and 
setteth  up  kings,  inasmuch  as  He  is  possessor  of  the  whole  world,  He  setteth  up  whom 
He  will  and  removeth  whom  He  will.  Removeth  is  put  before  setteth  up,  because 
kings  had  been  in  the  world  from  the  beginning,  ever  since  the  reign  of  Nimrod,  after 
the  flood  (cp.  Eccl.  i.  2).  He  giveth  wisdom  unto  the  wise  :  with  the  same  meaning 
as  above ;  wisdom  being  intellect  and  discrimination,  whereby  mankind  surpass  the 
brutes  and  each  other.  We  also  learn  that  the  wise  men  and  sages  of  the  world  are 
so  not  of  themselves,  but  only  because  God  has  given  them  their  wisdom'  and  their 
knowledge.  He  revealeth  the  deep :  alluding  to  the  unseen  world  which  he 
compares  to  an  object  lying  in  the  deep,  so  that  it  cannot  be  reached  ;  or  to  something 
hidden  and  concealed,  so  that  it  is  unknown,  with  the  same  idea  as  Is.  xli.  10;  or 

c  [II.  3.] 


lO  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [II.  24. 

possibly  he  means, '  He  revealeth  what  is  in  man's  heart,  which  none  understand  save 
the  Creator  of  the  heart  and  reins,  which  are  concealed  from  every  one,  but  known  to 
Him '  (Jer.  xvii.  10).  He  knoweth  what  is  in  the  darkness :  which  is  also  hid- 
den from  mankind,  inasmuch  as  the  organ  of  sight  cannot  see  in  the  dark :  whereas 
the  Creator  of  darkness  and  light  knows  what  is  in  the  one  as  He  knows  what  is  in  the 
other  (Ps.  cxxxix.  12) ;  the  purpose  being  that  He,  knowing  hidden  things,  knew  what  the 
king  had  seen,  and  had  revealed  it  to  Daniel.  After  mentioning  these  five  classes,  all 
corresponding  with  the  matter  and  circumstances  of  the  dream  {wisdom  and  strength 
with  the  amount  of  both  which  He  had  bestowed  on  Daniel,  changing  of  seasons  with 
the  vicissitudes  undergone  by  Israel  and  other  nations,  shewn  by  the  removing  of  a 
kingdom  and  the  establishment  of  a  kingdom  contained  in  the  dream ;  and  so  with 
the  revealing  of  secrets.,  etc.),  he  said  O  thou  God.  of  my  fathers  :  referring  to  the 
fathers  and  forefathers  whom  God  had  chosen  and  exalted,  Who  had  dealt  so  with 
Daniel  because  he  was  of  their  offspring.  He  praised  God  for  the  wisdom  and  might 
which  He  had  vouchsafed  him,  which  had  brought  him  to  his  high  station  before 
Nebuchadnezzar  saw  the  dream ;  now  it  was  a  period  of  twenty-two  years  from  the 
time  that  he  had  obtained  this  rank  in  the  king's  palace  to  the  present.  And  hast 
now  made  known  vmto  me  what  we  desired  of  Thee  :  referring  to  the  revelation 
of  the  king's  secret  fcp.  b).  He  first  described  how  God  had  dealt  with  him  from  the  time 
of  his  standing  before  the  king  till  the  present  crisis ;  then  he  described  how  He  had 
dealt  with  him  in  the  present  business ;  and  in  this  matter  he  associates  his  companions 
with  himself,  in  contrast  to  the  previous  time,  in  the  words,  what  we  desired  of  Thee  : 
i.  e,  I  and  my  companions ;  similarly  Thou  hast  made  known  unto  us.  He 
associates  his  companions  with  himself,  to  shew  that,  although  the  revelation  was 
made  to  him  and  not  to  them,  nevertheless  it  belonged  to  all  of  them,  since  all  of 
them  were  sought  for  execution,  and  all  had  prayed  and  humbled  themselves  (ver.  18). 
After  praising  Almighty  God  for  this,  he  went  to  Arioch  without  delay,  because  he  had 
already  pledged  his  word,  and  a  fixed  time  had  been  appointed  him  by  the  king. 
Possibly  he  had  asked  of  him  a  day  and  no  more  ;  and  while  they  four  stood  praying, 
it  came  to  pass  that  he  fell  asleep  and  saw  the  dream,  and  woke  rejoicing,  and  told  his 
companions,  and  they  too  blessed  the  Almighty  Creator.  Possibly  he  rose  in  the 
night,  at  once,  and  went  to  the  king  to  delight  him  with  the  news,  and  to  calm  the 
people's  horror  and  anguish ;  as  doubtless  the  country  was  dismayed  at  the  massacre 
of  the  wise  men,  and  at  the  thought  that  the  land  would  be  left  without  wise  men ; 
which  is  one  of  the  worse  misfortunes  that  can  befall  a  country. 

24.  He  went  to  Arioch  at  once,  for  two  reasons:  (i)  that  he  might  stay  the 
massacre  ;  (2)  that  he  might  introduce  him  before  the  king. 

25.  The  words,  I  have  fotuid  a  man,  when  the  king  must  have  known  of  Daniel 
certainly,  are  plainly  a  refutation  of  the  words  of  the  wise  men :  the  speaker  points 
out  that  by  the  children  of  the  captivity,  who  were  of  inferior  rank  and  low  esteem 
among  the  wise  men,  behold,  this  secret  shall  be  made  known. 

26.  He  had  already  promised  the  king  that  he  would  tell  him  the  interpretation  at 


II.  31.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  II 

the  time  appointed.  But  the  king  had  no  confidence  in  this.  Therefore  he  said, 
^ Canst  thou  do  this?'  i.e.  'tell  me  the  dream  and  the  interpretation  thereof;  let  us 
see  what  thou  wilt  say.'  He  employs  in  this  place  the  name  which  the  chief  eunuch 
surnamed  him,  because  it  was  an  honourable  one. 

27  sqq.  By  the  declaration  that  neither  the  wise  men  of  Babylon  nor  any  one  else 
could  do  what  the  king  had  demanded  of  them,  he  does  not  mean  to  excuse  them ; 
bis  only  object  therein  is  to  give  the  lie  to  all  the  sages  of  the  Gentiles  who  professed 
to  know  mysteries.  He  will  state  after  this  that  he  too  had  not  learned  this  secret  of 
himself,  but  the  Creator  had  revealed  it  to  him.  Then  he  told  him  that  God  Almighty 
revealed  secrets  to  whom  He  would,  because  it  was  He  who  shewed  men  dreams ; 
adding  that  God  had  made  manifest  to  him  (Daniel)  the  fancies  which  had  entered 
into  Nebuchadnezzar's  mind  concerning  the  future. 

28.  Thy  dream  and  the  visions  of  thy  head  :  i.  e.  thou  hast  indeed  demanded 
of  us  what  thou  hast  seen :  and,  lo,  I  will  shew  thee  what  thou  didst  see,  and  thou 
shalt  recognize  that  I  have  not  added  nor  taken  away  from  it. 

29.  He  mentions,  first,  a  matter  not  appertaining  to  the  dream,  nor  to  what  the 
king  had  forgotten  :  *  before  thou  didst  sleep  or  see  the  dream  thou  wast  thinking  of 
what  should  happen  hereafter  to  thy  kingdom,  which  has  reached  the  summit  of  its 
exaltation ;  and  who  should  receive  the  kingdom  after  thee.  And  since  this  was 
already  in  thy  mind,  and  thou  didst  desire  to  know  it,  the  Revealer  of  secrets  shewed 
thee  what  should  come  to  pass  hereafter,  that  thou  mightest  know  it,  and  mightest  know 
that  the  kingdom  is  to  belong  to  that  dynasty  which  shall  outlast  all  the  dynasties.' 

30.  '  I  have  not  learned  this  secret  by  wisdom  found  in  me,  and  peculiar  to  me 
above  the  rest  of  [mankind],  as  scholars  excel  one  another  in  different  sciences.'  The 
other  side  [i.  e.  the  power  by  which  he  had  learned  it]  he  does  not  explain  further  than 
by  saying,  '  God  has  revealed  this  to  me  that  thou  mayst  know  what  is  to  happen,  and 
that  on  which  thou  wast  pondering  and  which  thou  didst  desire  to  understand.'  Now 
the  purpose  of  God  in  shewing  him  the  dream  was,  first,  that  he  might  know  the  truth 
of  Israel's  assertion  that  the  kingdom  is  to  be  given  to  them  and  no  other  nation,  and 
that  the  kingdom  of  Nebuchadnezzar  shall  cease  and  be  transferred  to  another  and  an 
inferior,  to  increase  his  confusion  ;  and  to  shew  him  also  that  the  assertion  of  Israel  is 
true  that  God  Almighty  reveals  to  them  secrets  which  none  beside  them  understand ; 
and  that  the  secret  of  which  his  wise  men  stated,  that  none  but  the  angels  could 
uniierstand  it,  had  been  shewn  by  Almighty  God  to  Daniel ;  and  that  Almighty  God 
had  delivered  Daniel  and  his  fellows  from  death,  and  that  they  had  delivered  the 
other  wise  men  of  Babylon  (ver.  24).  Doubtless,  while  he  was  interpreting  the  dream, 
a  crowd  was  present  listening  to  his  voice.  And  at  the  words  As  for  thee,  O  kingy 
thy  thoughts  came  into  thy  mind  upon  thy  bed,  the  king  said,  *  It  was  so.'  That  too 
was  a  mystery  revealed  to  him  by  God.  * 

31.  He  attributes  to  the  image  four  qualities: 

(i)  Greatness :  i.e.  length,  breadth,  and  height;  referring  to  the  length  of  their 
duration,  and  the  greatness  of  their  power. 


12  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [II.  32. 

(2)  Order  ^  .•  referring  to  the  good  order  of  their  empire(s),  and  the  organization 
of  their  kingdom(s). 

(3)  Comeliness  :  because  each  one  of  them  had  armies. 

(4)  Fearfulness  and  awfidness  :  because  each  dynasty  was  fearful  and  terrible, 
especially  to  Israel. 

32-35.  He  tells  the  king  his  dream  as  he  had  seen  it ;  and  the  king  bore  witness 
to  his  accuracy.  Then  he  said,  '  And  now  we  will  interpret  it  to  thee  : '  for  none  of  his 
wise  men  could  interpret  it  any  more  than  they  could  interpret  his  second  dream. 

37-43.  He  notices  in  the  interpretation  one  of  the  features  of  the  image  which 
he  had  not  noticed  in  the  dream ;  in  the  dream  he  says  his  feet  part  of  iron  and 
part  of  clay,  but  in  the  interpretation,  the  feet  and  toes,  for  a  reason  which  we  shall 
explain. 

A  kingdom  powerful  and  strong :  powerful,  referring  to  the  number  of  his 
armies ;  strong,  to  his  vigour ;  hard,  referring  to  the  amount  of  his  wealth  and 
supplies,  and  the  obedience  of  mankind. 

And  wheresoever  men  dwell :  meaning  that  all  mankind  were  beneath  his 
sway,  so  much  so  that  even  the  beasts  and  birds  were  beneath  his  sovereignty, 
meaning  that  he  could  do  with  them  what  he  pleased  when  he  assailed  them.  Some 
say  there  is  an  allusion  to  his  being  with  them  during  the  seven  years  in  which  he 
*  abode  with  them.'  This  is  unlikely,  as  the  words  are  a  description  of  his  present 
condition,  and  do  not  refer  to  anything  in  the  future.  Compafe  Jer.  xxvii.  6, 
referring  to  the  terror  which  he  inspired  in  the  heart  of  all  beasts  and  birds.  Another 
fancied  it  referred  to  the  inhabitants  of  wildernesses  and  remote  islands.  Daniel 
continues :  *  And  because  thou  hast  reached  this  station,  and  art  the  first  and  most 
splendid  of  the  four  kingdoms,  thou  art  the  fine  golden  head.'  This  is  the  interpretation 
of  the  head  ;  *  and  he  that  shall  arise  after  thee  is  inferior  to  theej^  JPN  is  derived  from 
Ny"iN  '  earth,'  and  is  used  metaphorically  ;  meaning,  even  as  the  ground  is  below  man's 
feet.  Of  this  second  kingdom  he  says  another  because  its  religion  and  laws  were 
different  from  those  of  the  Chaldees  :  he  does  not  explain  this,  just  as  he  does  not 
dwell  on  the  description  of  the  third  kingdom,  contenting  himself  with  saying  that  it  is 
inferior  to  the  silver.  That  shall  rule  over  the  whole  earth:  to  distinguish 
between  the  second  and  the  third  kingdoms;  the  second  kingdom  owned  three 
quarters  of  the  world,  but  the  third  four  quarters ;  we  shall  give  the  reader  all  these 
explanations  in  full  in  the  commentary  on  Daniel's  dream.  Then  he  described  the 
fourth  kingdom,  which  he  compares  to  iron,  not  meaning  that  it  was  inferior  to 
the  brass,  but  on  account  of  its  hardness  (strong  as  iron),  and  because  this  kingdom 
should  pulverize  armies  as  iron  pulverizes  gold,  silver,  and  brass.  It  breaketh  in 
pieces  and  subdueth  all :  i.  e.  it  crushed  the  kingdoms  of  its  time,  as  we  shall 
explain  on  ver.  35.    This  is  the  kingdom  of  Rome,  before  the  kingdom  of  Arabia  arose. 


^  The  words  n  }3T  are  rendered  in  the  translation  'composite.' 


11.43.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL,  13 

He  makes  the  head  the  first  kingdom,  and  the  breast  and  arms  the  second  kingdom, 
and  the  belly  and  thighs  the  third  kingdom  :  and  he  makes  the  upper  parts  of  the  legs 
the  fourth  kingdom  before  the  kingdom  of  Arabia.  Now  he  does  not  say  of  the  fourth 
kingdom  '  another,'  as  he  said  of  the  second  and  third,  because  the  Greeks  are  the 
founders  of  the  kingdom  of  Rome,  as  we  shall  shew  in  chap.  viii.  And  whereas 
thou  sawest  the  feet  and  toes  :  feet  refers  to  the  instep  of  the  foot ;  then  he 
mentions  the  toes,  and  tells  us  that  the  feet  and  toes  of  this  image  were  like  the  feet 
and  toes  of  a  man,  two  feet  and  ten  toes ;  probably,  however,  the  statue  resembled  a 
human  being  also  in  its  erect  posture,  its  back,  hips,  legs,  as  well  as  feet  and  toes. 
He  unites  the  feet  and  toes  in  the  sentence  because  they  were  all  of  the  same 
material,  iron  and  clay  (cp.  ver.  33).  The  iron  represents  the  Romans,  and  the  clay  the 
Arabs ;  and  this  is  because  the  Romans  reigned  a  hundred  years  before  the  Arabs ; 
then  the  Arabs  began  to  reign,  but  the  kingdom  of  the  Romans  remained,  as  is 
witnessed  in  our  own  day.  He  compares  the  kingdom  of  the  Arabs  to  clay,  because 
they  have  neither  power  nor  force  like  those  of  the  Romans.  A  divided  kingdom  : 
i.  e.  from  the  time  of  the  reign  of  the  Arabs,  inasmuch  as  the  kingdom  was  first  to  the 
Romans  only,  then  the  Arabs  reigned  with  them.  And  part  of  iron  :  to  shew  that 
this  iron  which  is  mixed  with  the  clay  is  not  other  than  the  former  iron,  but  the  same. 
The  interpretation  is  that  the  kingdom  of  the  Romans  shall  remain  simultaneously 
with  the  kingdom  of  the  Arabs,  and  that  the  Arabs  shall  be  partners  with  them 
therein  ;  hence,  and  part  of  clay  shall  be  therein.  Mixed  with  miry  clay  :  not  a 
mixture  in  which  the  ingredients  mingle,  as  gold  mixes  with  silver;  as  this  is  not 
possible  between  such  substances  as  iron  and  clay ;  but  a  mixture  like  that  of  wheat 
and  barley,  or  similar  substances ;  part,  therefore,  of  the  instep  of  the  foot  is  iron  and 
part  clay.  This  is  possible  because  of  the  length  of  the  instep.  The  same  is  the  case 
with  the  toes.  In  the  description  of  the  toes,  part  of  iron  and  part  of  clay,  probably 
this  iron  does  not  belong  to  the  Romans,  but  is  to  be  interpreted  of  the  Arabs  only. 
In  the  interpretation  of  this  he  says  so  the  kingdom  shall  be  partly  strong  and 
partly  broken.  Either  he  means  that  its  beginnings  were  powerful  (as  we  shall 
explain  in  the  proper  place  in  this  book),  and  its  end  feeble;  in  which  case 
the  toes  where  they  joined  the  instep  must  have  been  iron,  and  the  ends  clay.  Or 
he  may  be  referring  to  the  kingdom  of  certain  of  the  children  of  'the  Master' 
(Muhammad),  who  were  powerful,  and  others  who  were  to  follow  them  and  be  weak 
like  clay. 

And  whereas  thou  sawest  the  iron  mixed  with  miry  clay  does  not  refer 
to  the  mixture  of  the  toes,  since  he  does  not  use  the  word  mixture  of  them,  but  says 
only  part  of  them  were  iron  and  part  clay.  This  can  only  refer  to  the 
mixture  of  the  feet,  of  which  he  had  said  forasmuch  as  thou  sawest,  etc.  This  is 
the  mixture  of  the  Romans  and  the  Arabs  ;  he  tells  us  that  just  as  they  are  associated 
in  empire  (a  divided  kingdom),  so  they  shall  be  mixed  in  the  matter  of  marrying 
and  begetting  children,  neither  party  disapproving  of  this,  as  Israel  does ;  for  this 
reason,  too,  he  said  they  shall  mingle  themselves  with  the  seed  of  men.    For 


14  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [II.  44. 

the  Moslem  does  not  refuse  to  take  a  wife  of  the  Christian  religion,  nor  the  Christian 
to  take  a  wife  of  the  religion  of  Islam. 

But  they  shall  not  cleave  to  one  another  :  since  they  disagree  with  one 
another  on  the  fundamental  doctrines,  the  one  confessing  One  God,  and  believing 
that  'Isa  (Jesus),  the  son  of  Maryam  (Mary),  was  a  mortal;  whereas  the  others 
believe  that  He  is  the  Creator  of  the  heavens  and  earth,  as  is  well  known  concerning 
the  Christian  religion.  Similarly  do  they  differ  about  the  Qiblah  and  many  other 
subjects  too  long  to  explain.  This  is  why  he  says  they  shall  not  cleave  one  to 
another ;  which  is  explained  in  the  words  even  as  iron,  etc.,  i.  e.  as  iron  does  not 
mingle  with  clay. 

So  far  for  the  description  of  the  statue.  Now  for  the  interpretation  of  it.  It 
means  four  kingdoms  which  are  to  arise  in  the  world.  "YYl^  first  is  the  kingdom  which 
laid  waste  Jerusalem  and  took  the  people  captive  from  their  homes.  After  it  came 
the  kingdom  of  the  Persians,  which  ordered  the  House  to  be  built,  and  permitted  the 
people  to  go  thither,  and  gave  the  money  and  charges  and  offerings  out  of  its  treasures. 
The  third  is  the  kingdom  of  the  Greeks,  which  neither  took  the  people  captive  nor 
laid  waste  their  dwellings  :  however,  harm  was  done  the  nation  by  them,  as  the  Jews 
have  handed  down  in  their  books  and  records,  though  the  books  of  the  Prophets  do 
not  expressly  state  it.  As  for  the  fourth  empire,  it  has  carried  Israel  into  captivity,  as 
the  first  did,  and  gone  further  than  it  in  enmity  and  injury ;  and  as  for  the  Arabs, 
they  have  not  indeed  acted  like  the  others  in  exiling  them  and  destroying  them,  but 
they  have  injured  the  nation  in  the  way  of  contempt  and  scorn  and  humiliation,  etc.,  of 
which  we  shall  mention  some  specimens  in  the  commentary  on  the  dream  of  Daniel  and 
his  prophecy.  He  represents  all  these  empires  as  attached  to  each  other,  because 
there  was  not  a  follower  of  the  truth  among  them,  though  their  systems  differed :  and 
he  makes  them  all  one  piece. 

After  giving  the  interpretation  of  the  image  he  gives  that  of  the  stone  which  was 
cut  from  the  mountain  and  brake  the  image. 

44,  45.  He  compared  the  four  kingdoms  to  a  wrought  image,  but  the  kingdom  of 
Israel  to  a  stone  cut  out  of  a  mountain,  because  their  kingdom  is  eternal:  either 
it  means  the  nation,  or  the  Messiah,  who  is  of  them,  or  of  the  seed  of  David.  He  said 
in  the  dream  that  it  brake  the  feet  of  the  image,  i.  e.  that  they  shall  crush  Edom  (i.  e. 
Rome)  and  Ishmael.  Then  he  says  then  were  broken  in  pieces  together, 
inasmuch  as  the  religion  of  each  kingdom  and  some,  too,  of  the  people  shall  remain 
till  the  Messiah's  kingdom.  He  tells  us  that  it  shall  break  and  destroy  the  remnants 
of  the  three  previous  kingdoms,  them  and  their  religions ;  it  shall  break  in  pieces 
and  consume  all  these  kingdoms.  He  points  out  the  difference  between  these 
four  kingdoms  and  that  of  the  Messiah.  Of  every  one  of  these  four  kingdoms  the 
dominion  ceases,  and  is  given  to  another :  but  this  kingdom  shall  not  pass  away,  nor 
be  given  to  another.  And  he  did  not  say  of  the  image  that  God  Almighty  had  set  it 
up,  as  he  says  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah  the  God  of  heaven  shall  set  up  a 
kingdom,  because  they  are  weak  and  few  in  number,  and  it  is  God  who  will  raise 


III.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  15 

them  from  the  dust,  and  bring  down  the  others  from  the  height,  since  it  was  He  who 
brought  them  down  from  the  height  (Lam.  ii.  12)  and  raised  the  empire  of  the  others 
(ibid.  ii.  14) ;  and  He  will  do  the  same  in  the  time  to  come,  raising  the  estate  of  Israel 
and  afflicting  the  empires  (cp.  Ps.  cxiii.  5).  And  God  Almighty  shewed  this  dream  to 
Nebuchadnezzar,  because  he  was  the  first  of  the  kings  and  the  greatest  of  them ; 
to  shew  to  him  and  every  king  who  should  arise,  the  superiority  of  Israel,  and  what 
should  come  to  pass  in  the  latter  days,  and  that  every  dynasty  should  be  destroyed 
when  her  empire  began,  and  that  none  should  think  itself  a  lasting  dynasty ;  and  that 
it  will  be  well  for  them  not  to  afflict  Israel,  because  they  are  suffering  disciphne,  that 
is  all ;  and  if  they  do  otherwise,  God  will  be  wroth  with  them  and  punish  them.  And 
thereby  too  He  teaches  His  people  to  be  patient,  knowing  the  transitoriness  of  these 
empires  and  the  durability  of  their  own,  and  that  all  nations  shall  bow  before  them. 
And  therein  is  their  great  consolation. 

And  the  dream  is  certain  and  the  interpretation  thereof  siire  :  i.e.  this 
dream  came  not  from  fancy,  or  occupation  of  spirit,  as  men  sometimes  see  in  dreams 
what  they  have  been  doing  or  pondering,  and  when  they  see  it,  there  is  no  interpreta- 
tion to  be  realized  in  the  future  ;  no,  this  is  a  dream  which  God  purposed  to  shew  him. 

And  the  interpretation  thereof  sure  :  i.  e.  this  interpretation  of  mine  is 
accurate,  and  there  is  no  explanation  other  than  what  we  have  given. 

46.  Believing  that  there  was  in  Daniel  a  portion  of  the  divine  power,  like  what  the 
Christians  hold  of  the  Messiah,  he  put  him  in  the  place  of  God,  and  fell  on  his  face 
before  him  and  bowed  down  to  him,  and  commanded  that  sacrifices  should  be  brought 
to  him,  as  they  are  brought  to  a  god ;  he  does  not  say  that  he  brought  them  to  him  : 
most  probably  Daniel  prohibited  him  from  doing  so. 

47.  Of  a  truth :  he  acknowledges  that  God  is  the  God  of  gods,  and  that  it  was 
thereby  that  Daniel  could  know  this  mystery.  Then  he  called  him  Rabbi  ^,  i.  e.  made 
of  himself  his  pupil  and  his  slave.  Then  he  bestowed  on  him  many  splendid  gifts,  as 
he  had  promised  the  Chaldees,  ver.  6 ;  adding  a  distinction  which  he  had  not  expressly 
mentioned  to  them,  viz.  making  him  sultan  of  the  province  of  Babylon  and  chief  of  all 
the  wise  men  of  Babylon. 

49.  When  he  had  attained  high  station  it  was  impossible  for  him  that  his  fellows 
should  be  left  with  none.  As  for  himself,  he  was  established  in  the  king's  gate, — not 
as  porter,  but  rather  to  inspect  men's  business  in  the  same  way  as  Joseph  did  :  so  that 
the  king  had  the  title  and  Daniel  gave  the  commands  and  prohibitions.  The  writer 
tells  us  of  the  rank  of  his  associates  by  way  of  introduction  to  the  sequel. 

III. 
The  matter  narrated  belongs  to  the  history  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  but  Hananiah, 
Mishael,  and  Azaria  enter  into  it.    It  is  told  us  on  account  of  the  great  edification 
to  be  got  from  it. 

*  Translation  of  ver.  48 :  '  Then  the  king  called  Daniel  my  lord,  and  my  master,'  etc. 


l6  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [III. 

The  first  thing  necessary  to  explain  is,  What  moved  Nebuchadnezzar  to  make  this 
image  ?  Our  answer  is,  that  when  he  became  master  of  the  world  he  made  it,  and  the 
herald  proclaimed  that  whosoever  should  not  come  forward  and  bow  down  should  be 
cast  into  the  fiery  furnace.  By  doing  this  they  would  shew  their  allegiance  to  him ; 
before  they  were  under  his  sovereignty  he  could  not  have  done  it.  He  had  already 
another  deity  whom  he  served  (ver.  14).  His  will  was  accomplished  as  soon  as  it  was 
seen  that  all  mankind — except  the  Jews  mentioned  in  the  Scripture— bowed  down  to 
it.  He  records  its  height  and  its  size;  the  latter  containing  its  length  and  breadth. 
He  set  it  up  in  the  plain  of  Dura  because  it  could  contain  a  great  crowd  of  men 
standing.  He  made  its  height  sixty  cubits,  that  they  might  see  it  from  a  distance  and 
bow  down  to  it  from  every  quarter.  He  did  not  set  it  up  before  collecting  the  people  : 
rather,  he  made  it  first,  then  sent  and  brought  the  people  from  all  the  cities  of  the 
world,  and  when  they  were  come  to  Babylon  set  it  up  and  ordered  them  to  bow  down 
to  it.  He  brought  the  nobles,  not  the  common  people,  which  would  have  been 
impossible ;  ,  the  world  would  have  been  desolated  and  the  place  could  not  have 
contained  them  either.  Those  who  came  must  have  left  substitutes  to  keep  their 
places  till  they  returned.  He  tells  us  that  when  they  were  summoned  they  came  and 
did  not  disobey ;  which  fact,  by  itself,  shewed  their  allegiance  to  him.  And  when  they 
were  gathered  in  Babylon,  he  made  a  banquet  in  honour  of  the  image ;  and  the  people 
gathered  and  bowed  down,  and  after  that  went  to  eat  and  drink ;  they  did  not  eat 
before  they  had  bowed.  Probably  he  had  slaughtered  victims  and  made  them  ready 
for  them.  Then,  after  they  had  gathered  together,  he  set  up  musicians  with  their 
instruments,  and  when  they  were  standing  in  front  of  the  image,  he  bade  the  heralds 
go  about  among  the  people  and  say  :  *  Ye  tribes  of  men,  take  heed,  and  fail  not  to  bow 
down  to  the  image ;  whensoever  ye  hear  the  sound  of  the  musical  instruments,  let 
every  one  fall  on  his  face  bowing  to  the  image,  and  whosoever  shall  not  bow  down, 
that  moment  shall  he  be  cast  into  the  fiery  furnace.'  This  shews  that  he  must  have 
built  a  great  furnace  in  order  that  if  any  man  disobeyed  he  might  be  thrown  into  the 
fire.  Most  probably  he  had  sent  some  persons  before  him  to  go  about  among  the 
people  who  had  come  from  the  countries,  to  see  whether  any  one  disobeyed  or  not. 
Then  the  writer  informs  us  that  all  who  were  present  bowed  down  after  they  had 
heard  the  sound  of  the  musical  instruments,  except  the  three  mentioned  above.  We 
are  left  with  one  of  two  alternatives.  Either  he  desired  the  people  to  abandon  their 
religions  and  serve  a  god  other  than  their  own ;  or  he  desired  their  allegiance  only. 
As  it  is  not  probable  that  he  desired  them  to  give  up  their  gods,  since  the  religions 
remained  intact,  each  nation  serving  its  god,  we  must  suppose  that  he  desired  of  them 
allegiance  and  nothing  more.  What  we  must  remember  about  all  the  Jews  who  were 
in  Babylon  is  that  the  king  did  not  require  this  of  the  common  people,  but  only  of  the 
dignitaries  and  nobles  :  not  of  the  others.  Had  not  Hananiah,  Mishael,  and  Azaria 
been  dignitaries — as  was  mentioned  before — he  would  not  have  made  them  appear  in 
the  throng,  nor  have  required  them  to  bow  down.  As  for  the  case  of  Daniel,  he  was 
not  required  to  bow  down  to  the  image  because  his  station  was  too  high,  as  he 


III.  18.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  17 

occupied  the  place  of  a  god  with  the  king  (ii.  46).  Those  who  accused  them  were 
minions  of  the  king,  whom  he  had  ordered  to  take  note  of  the  people. 

12.  They  serve  not  thy  god  :  i.  e.  the  god  whom  he  served  before  he  set  up  the 
image. 

We  learn  that  when  he  was  told  that  they  bowed  not  down  to  the  image,  he  was 
filled  with  wrath  and  his  colour  changed.  Either  this  was  because  *  *  » 
or  because  opposition  had  come  from  them;  [and  he  feared]  that,  when  this  was 
known  to  others,  his  authority  would  be  weakened ;  and  had  it  not  been  for  that,  he 
would  not  have  thought  it  a  grave  matter.  The  latter  is  more  probable  to  my  mind. 
He  did  not  know  what  to  do,  and  perhaps  did  not  finish  the  dedication  of  the  image. 

He  ordered  them  to  be  brought  before  him  and  began  to  upbraid  them  ;  perhaps, 
he  thought,  they  would  make  an  excuse  of  some  kind,  so  that  their  joy  need  not  be 
troubled  [i.  e.  so  that  they  need  not  be  punished]. 

15.  Now  are  ye  ready?  i.e.  'did  ye  just  now  hear  the  proclamation,  or  has  the 
herald  not  yet  come  forward  with  it  ?'  Perhaps  he  said  this  in  order  that  they  might 
make  some  excuse,  that  the  people  might  know  that  they  did  not  slight  him  ;  though 
the  time  for  bowing  had  already  passed ;  for  he  only  desired  the  people  to  bow  down 
at  the  time  when  they  heard  the  sound  of  the  musical  instruments.  But  the  answer 
they  returned  was  not  an  excuse ;  on  the  contrary,  they  spoke  plainly  to  him,  so  that 
it  became  necessary,  in  his  view,  for  him  to  do  what  he  did. 

16.  We  do  not  need :  i.  e.  '  it  is  not  necessary  for  us  to  make  any  excuse,  as 
perhaps  thou  wouldst  suggest ;  and  as  for  thy  saying  "  What  god  is  he,"  thou  art  to 
know  that  our  God  is  able  to  deliver  us  from  the  fiery  furnace  wherewith  thou 
threatenest  us  in  many  ways,  and  if  thou  command  us  to  be  slain  by  some  other  means, 
He  is  able  to  deliver  us  from  that  too.' 

18.  And  if  not :  this  does  not  mean  'if  He  is  not  able,'  which  would  be  in 
contradiction  to  their  assertion,  ver.  17.  It  means,  'if  He  should  not  deliver  us  ;  for 
He  will  not  leave  us  in  thy  hand  out  of  inability.  Nor  do  we  serve  Him  in  order  that 
He  may  deliver  us  from  punishment  in  this  world,  but  only  that  we  may  be  delivered 
from  punishment  in  the  next  world,  and  receive  our  eternal  reward  ;  so  thou  mayest 
know  that  what  was  told  thee  of  us  is  true ;  we  have  not  served  thy  god,  nor  thy 
image,  nor  shall  we  serve  them  in  time  to  come  either.'  And  this  they  said  in  the 
presence  of  the  crowds  that  had  bowed  down  to  the  image. 

From  this  verse  we  learn  that  it  is  unlawful  to  bow  down  to  an  image,  even  though 
a  man  does  not  believe  in  its  sanctity.  The  foundation  of  this  is  in  the  law  (Ex.  xx.  5). 
We  also  learn  that  there  is  another  world  of  rewards.  For,  if  there  were  no  other 
world  after  this,  in  what  did  they  trust,  that  they  did  not  bow  down  to  the  image  ?  And 
for  what  did  they  hope,  that  they  gave  their  bodies  to  be  burnt  ?  Or  why  did^Daniel  let 
himself  be  thrown  into  the  lions'  den  ?  The  words  if  not  shew  that  in  their  opinion  it 
was  possible  that  God  might  let  His  servants  be  tormented  and  slain  by  the  hand  of 
unbelievers,  to  reward  them  for  it  in  the  next  world.  They  knew  all  this,  and  yet  did 
not  commit  the  crime. 

d  [II.  3.] 


l8  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [III.  22. 

He  ordered  them  to  throw  in  seven  times  as  much  wood  as  was  ordinarily 
thrown  in,  to  terrify  them,  that  they  might  repent  and  humble  themselves ;  but  they 
did  not  care  for  his  words  or  think  about  them.  Then  we  are  told  that  he  commanded 
them  to  be  bound  in  their  clothes ;  and  the  king's  order  was  obeyed. 

Jin^JJ'^DD,  their  vests. 

pnnb-l3,  their  belts. 

}in''B>137,  either  their  turbans,  or  their  bonnets,  as  they  were  dressed  like 
governors. 

They  were  thrown  with  engines,  because  the  furnace  was  high,  and  raised  above 
the  level  of  the  ground,  and  they  were  thrown  over  the  top  of  it.  They  were  not 
introduced  by  the  door  of  the  furnace,  because  the  king  wished  to  make  the  scene  as 
terrible  as  possible,  and  in  order  that  the  crowds  of  bystanders  might  look  on  at  a 
distance,  on  some  high  ground.  Possibly  he  flung  in  each  one  separately,  one  after 
the  other  ;  he  threw  in,  let  us  suppose,  Hananiah  first,  that  the  two  might  take  fright ; 
but  they  did  not  care ;  so  he  threw  in  the  second,  and  the  last  did  not  care. 

22.  The  writer  now  tells  us  how  those  who  threw  them  in  were  slain  by  the  heat  of 
the  sparks  of  fire.  This  was  because  the  fuel  flew  up  when  they  fell  in ;  a  fierce  flame 
came  out  of  it ;  and  when  the  heat  caught  them,  they  perished.  Nebuchadnezzar  was 
standing  on  the  high  place  when  they  flung  them  out  of  the  engine,  looking  on  the 
furnace ;  there  can  have  been  no  smoke  ascending,  which  would  have  hidden  the 
furnace  from  view ;  and  he  beheld  them,  and  lo,  they  were  going  to  and  fro  in  the 
flame.  And  he  was  terrified  and  amazed  thereby  (ver.  24),  and  spoke  to  his  courtiers 
as  recorded.  Either  these  were  present  with  him,  but  did  not  see  what  he  saw, 
through  God  hiding  it  from  them  (as  happened  to  Daniel  when  he  saw  the  angel 
whom  no  one  else  saw,  as  we  shall  explain  infra),  so  that  they  saw  neither  the  angel 
nor  the  three.  Or  it  may  be  that  his  courtiers  saw  the  three,  but  did  not  see  the 
angel. 

24.  Were  not  three  men  P  He  tells  them  that  he  sees  something  they  do  not. 
Perhaps  he  asked  first  for  information  from  them,  to  know  whether  they  saw  it  or  not ; 
and  then  he  said  'Did  not  we  throw  in  three  men  and  no  more?'  And  they  said 
'  Aye.'  Then  he  said,  *  Lo,  I  see  four  persons,  only  the  fourth  is  like  the  angels.'  The 
other  three  were,  of  course,  Shadrach,  etc.  Then,  when  he  saw  them  going  to  and 
fro  in  the  furnace,  not  going  out  of  the  furnace,  he  said  in  himself,  'These  men 
will  not  go  out,  however  long  they  stay ;  it  is  as  if  they  were  in  a  garden,  taking 
their  pleasure.'  So  he  approached  the  door  of  the  furnace  to  ask  them  to  go  out 
from  the  furnace,  since  there  was  no  way  out  save  by  the  door ;  apparently  they 
wished  to  shew  that  the  person  who  should  take  them  out  must  be  himself,  and  that 
they  would  not  go  out  save  by  his  command.  So  he  approached  the  furnace  and  said 
to  them,  '  Come  out,  come ; '  the  angel  must  have  been  with  them  till  they  left  the 
furnace,  because  so  long  as  he  was  with  them  no  mischief  from  the  fire  could  come  to 
them.    When  they  went  out,  they  were  not  naked,  but  covered  with  their  clothes ;  in 


111.24.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  19 

their  tunics  only,  out  of  all  their  clothes,  since  only  these  are  mentioned.  And  the 
Creator  and  Worker  of  miracles  caused  these  tunics  to  remain,  to  cover  them,  and 
that  all  might  see  the  marvel  that  some  of  their  clothes  should  be  burnt,  while  others 
remained  unbumt.  We  are  told  above  that  the  fire  did  not  attack  any  part  of  their 
bodies,  so  that  even  in  the  nails  of  the  feet  and  the  hands,  in  which  no  great  harm 
would  be  done,  they  were  not  injured  by  it.  Their  hair  was  not  singed  :  as  hair 
naturally  is  by  a  little  fire,  when  it  comes  near  it.  Nor  had  the  smell  of  fire  passed 
on  them  :  it  could  not  be  smelt  in  their  bodies  or  in  their  tunics  ;  this  is  not  astonishing, 
as  a  work  of  the  Almighty  Creator ;  He  put  a  screen  between  the  fire  and  them,  by  one 
of  those  mercies  of  which  He  is  capable,  but  not  between  the  fire  and  their  garments ; 
blessed  be  He,  Worker  of  miracles  impossible  to  His  creatures  (cp.  Ps.  cxxxvi,  4). 
This  overthrows  the  doctrine  of  those  who  would  do  away  with  miracles,  and  reject 
this  narrative.  Now  God  Almighty  displayed  this  mighty  miracle  in  the  time  of 
Nebuchadnezzar,  as  He  displayed  His  miracles  in  Egypt,  annulling  thereby  the  systems 
of  the  Magicians  till  they  confessed  and  said,  'This  is  the  finger  of  God'  (Ex.  vii.  15). 
And  so,  when  Nebuchadnezzar  and  the  rest  of  his  princes  had  witnessed  this,  they 
believed  in  the  work  of  the  Creator,  and  thereafter  he  blessed  the  Creator,  saying : 
Blessed  is  their  God,  etc.  An  hour  before  his  language  to  them  had  been :  And 
who  is  the  God  who  shall  save  you  from  my  hand  ? 

"Who  sent  His  angel :  he  had  witnessed  the  angel  going  with  them ;  God 
Almighty  had  sent  the  angel  to  make  him  certain  that  this  was  His  work,  and  none 
other's. 

And  saved  His  servants :  observing  that  they  were  saved  through  relying  on 
Him,  not  caring  for  his  threats,  and  changing  the  king's  word. 

But  gave  up  their  bodies :  i.  e.  they  gave  over  their  bodies  to  the  fire,  and  all 
that  they  might  serve  no  other  god. 

And  a  decree  is  set  forth  by  me  :  he  ordered  that  a  stop  should  be  put  to  the 
societies  of  religious  speculation,  wherein  the  doctrines  of  the  Unitarians  were  reprobated. 
That  whoever  speaketh  error  against  their  God  shall  be  hewn,  i.  e.  his  body 
cut  in  pieces,  and  his  property  be  confiscate  to  the  sultan. 

For  there  is  no  other  god  :  he  decides  that  among  all  the  gods  there  is  none 
able  to  deliver  his  servants  from  afflictions  and  punishments  like  Him. 

After  this  he  tells  us  what  the  king  did  with  them  afterwards.  He  promoted,  i.  e. 
he  increased  their  rank  and  dignity. 

People  may  ask  about  the  previous  assertion  of  Nebuchadnezzar  at  the  time  in 
which  Daniel  interpreted  his  dream  to  him,  '  Of  a  truth  your  God,  etc.,'  and  they  may 
say, '  Does  not  this  language  shew  that  he  believed  in  God  Almighty  and  His  miracles  ? 
How  then  can  he  have  dealt  so  with  them  or  said,  "  And  who  is  the  God  whp  shall  save 
you  from  my  hand?"'  The  answer  is  that  it  was  not  more  extraordinary  than  that 
our  ancestors  should  have  witnessed  God's  wonders  and  His  talking  with  them  on 
Mount  Sinai,  and  after  a  few  days  should  have  served  the  calf,  explaining  away  in 
some  manner  what  they  had  witnessed.    How  much  more  natural  that  such  should  be 

d2 


20  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [TIL  31. 

the  conduct  of  Nebuchadnezzar  the  idolator !     At  the  time,  probably,  he  believed ; 
afterwards  he  apostatised  by  the  aid  of  some  of  these  false  explanations.     Doubtless 
God  punished  him  for  his  apostasy,  and  for  admitting  doubts  into  his  mind. 
(Fourth  Chapter.) 

31.  These  are  the  letters  written  by  king  Nebuchadnezzar  to  all  the  people  of  the 
world,  after  the  completion  of  the  seven  years  which  passed  over  him  when  he  was 
among  the  wild  beasts.  When  his  reason  had  returned  to  him  and  he  was  once  more 
king,  he  wrote  the  letters,  in  which  he  narrates  the  story ;  beginning  with  Signs  and 
wonders  and  ending  with  and  those  that  walk  in  pride. 

32.  Signs  and  wonders  :  alluding  to  what  had  happened  to  him  during  the  seven 
years,  which  we  shall  recount  in  its  place.  It  was  pleasing  before  me :  meaning 
that  he  felt  bound  to  tell  them  to  the  world,  and  not  to  refrain  from  publishing  and 
proclaiming  them,  and  thanking  God  for  them. 

33.  His  signs :  i.  e.  both  the  wonderful  works  recorded  above,  and  those  which 
God  is  constandy  performing.  Shewing  that  he  believed  in  them,  and  did  not  reject 
them  as  the  philosophers  do. 

His  kingdom  is  an  everlasting  kingdom :  meaning  (i)  that  it  endures  infinitely; 
(2)  that  He  does  what  He  thinks  fit  in  His  world,  and  that  His  dominion  is  over  all 
while  the  times  and  periods  change  (cp.  Ps.  cxlv.  13). 

IV. 

1.  He  tells  us  that  he  saw  the  dream  at  the  time  when  he  was  at  peace,  and 
no  necessity  for  expeditions  occurred  :  the  world  being  completely  at  his  feet,  without 
enemies  or  rivals  ;  his  affairs  and  business  being  all  in  due  order. 

Green  in  my  palace  refers  to  his  bodily  health  and  personal  appearance  when 
his  affairs  were  settled,  as  opposed  to  the  condition  in  which  he  was  during  the 
periods  when  he  was  engaged  in  wars. 

2.  He  tells  us  that  he  saw  a  dream  which  made  an  impression  on  him,  and  which 
he  did  not  forget  as  he  had  forgotten  the  first  dream :  and  when  he  woke,  lo,  he  was 
in  terror.  Or,  the  first  part  may  be  a  description  of  his  condition  during  the  time  in 
which  he  was  seeing  the  dream  and  hearing  the  voice  of  the  angels.  Cut  down  the 
oak ;  and  the  words  and  thoughts  on  my  bed  troubled  me,  an  account  of  his 
condition  after  waking,  meaning  that  he  was  pondering  on  what  he  had  seen,  and 
troubled  and  amazed,  not  knowing  the  interpretation. 

3.  4.  He  did  not,  we  see,  send  for  Daniel  to  appear  before  him,  and  ask  him 
to  interpret  the  dream,  notwithstanding  that  Daniel  was  present  in  Babylon.  He 
sent  first  to  the  wise  men  of  Babylon  for  the  following  reason :  when  he  demanded  of 
them  the  first  dream,  they  said  repeatedly,  *  Tell  us  the  dream  and  we  undertake  to 
interpret  it.'  So  when  he  saw  this  dream,  knowing  that  the  interpretation  of  it  was 
difficult,  he  determined  to  tell  it  to  the  different  orders  of  the  wise  men  of  Babylon,  in 
order  that,  when  they  were  found  unable  to  interpret  it,  their  inferiority  might  be 
clearly  proved  to  themselves  and  to  mankind  in  general ;  and  that  he  might  afterwards 


IV.  20.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  ai 

send  for  Daniel,  who  would  tell  him  the  dream  before  them,  and  explain  it  step  by 
step ;  so  that  his  superiority  would  come  out  as  clearly  as  that  of  Joseph,  when 
the  wise  men  of  Egypt  were  unable  to  interpret  the  dream  of  Pharaoh,  and  they 
all  acknowledged  his  wisdom  (Gen.  xli.  38). 

5,  6.  He  had  called  him  Belteshazzar,  the  name  of  his  god,  because  of  the 
spirit  of  the  holy  gods  which  was  to  be  found  in  him  ;  the  name  was  a  distinction. 

According  to  the  name  of  my  god  :  some  have  supposed  that  in  spite  of  all  the 
events  which  had  happened  to  him,  he  continued  to  worship  idols,  owing  to  some 
delusion  or  other,  or  else  for  political  purposes  ;  as,  if  he  proclaimed  to  the  world  that 
he  adopted  the  religion  of  the  Jews,  their  laws  would  be  incumbent  on  him,  and 
he  would  fall.  He  was  therefore  unwilling  to  withdraw  himself  from  his  god,  so  that 
he  magnified  the  God  of  heaven,  but  did  not  give  up  his  own  religion.  Or  it  may 
refer  to  that  which  he  had  been  accustomed  to  serve  before  he  believed  in  God 
Almighty. 

Whom  I  know,  from  what  had  occurred  in  the  first  dream,  when  the  secret  had 
been  revealed  to  him. 

7  sqq.  After  being  told  the  dream,  and  how  *  none  but  thee  of  the  wise  men  of 
Babylon  can  interpret  it,  but  thou  canst  because  of  the  divine  wisdom  that  is  in  thee, 
so  tell  the  interpretation  thereof,'  Daniel  pondered  and  did  not  commence  inter- 
preting till  the  king  spoke  to  him.  This  was  not  bewilderment  on  Daniel's  part 
concerning  the  interpretation,  owing  to  the  matter  being  concealed  from  him  ;  he  was 
rather  pondering  how  to  approach  the  king,  it  being  improper  to  approach  him  directly 
with  the  interpretation,  owing  to  its  content,  viz.,  misfortunes  to  happen  to  the  king ; 
he  also  saw  that  it  would  not  be  well  when  the  king  asked  him  for  the  interpretation 
that  he  should  fail  to  give  it.  He  thought  it  therefore  the  safest  course  to  ponder  till 
the  king  spoke  and  asked  him.  The  severe  effort  of  thinking  had  made  his  colour 
change ;  when  the  king  saw  him  thus  he  said,  Let  not  the  dream  or  its  inter- 
pretation trouble  thee,  thinking  that  he  would  require  to  ponder  deeply  over  it. 
Daniel  answered  that  he  had  not  held  back  the  interpretation  because  it  had  troubled 
him,  but  only  on  the  king's  behalf;  otherwise  he  might  have  hastened  to  interpret  it 
at  once. 

19.  The  dream  be  to  them  that  hate  thee  :  an  expression  of  civility  and  courtesy, 
it  being  improper  to  commence  otherwise.  It  has  been  thought  that  Daniel  may  have 
meant  the  enemies  of  God  Almighty,  and  those  that  hate  Him,  Nebuchadnezzar  being 
one  of  them.  Then  he  proceeded  to  divide  the  dream  into  three  parts,  and  to  inter- 
pret each  part  separately. 

20.  'The  greatness,  might  and  height  of  the  tree  that  thou  sawest,  with  food 
therein  for  all  animals,  and  dwelling  for  them  beneath  it  and  in  it,'  represents  the 
height  of  the  kingdom  and  its  extension  to  the  end  of  the  world.  One  thing  is  left 
unexplained,  sc.  v.  21 :  Whose  leaves  were  fair  and  the  fruit  thereof  much  ;  the 
first  refers  to  the  beauty  of  his  armies  and  his  children,  and  the  second  to  the  quantity 
of  goods  that  he  had  collected  from  the  countries.    In  it  was  meat  for  all,  refers 


22  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [IV.  20. 

to  his  stores.  The  beasts  of  the  field  had  shadow  tinder  it :  i.  e.  the  nomads. 
The  fowls  symbolize  all  those  who  had  come  to  him  from  all  countries,  and  attached 
themselves  to  his  dominion  and  housed  themselves  under  his  protection.  And  all 
flesh  was  fed  of  it  most  probably  refers  to  the  profit  enjoyed  by  mankind  after  his 
dominion  had  been  established.  Then  he  expounds  the  second  part,  the  voice  of  the 
angels  which  he  had  heard  (ver.  14).  Observe  that  of  these  two  angels  one  was  in  the 
height,  the  one  that  said  Hew  down  the  tree,  who  is  called  a  watcher,  and  was 
higher  in  rank  than  the  holy  one,  who  asked  the  '  watcher '  to  let  the  roots  of  the  tree 
remain  in  their  place  (ver.  15).  The  sentence  is  by  the  decree  of  the  watchers, 
refers  to  Hew  down  the  tree,  etc. ;  the  demand  is  by  the  word  of  the  holy  one, 
to  the  demand  that  the  stump  of  his  roots  should  be  left.  The  names  are  used  first 
in  the  singular  (ver.  13),  afterwards  in  the  plural  (ver.  17) ;  this  shews  that  they  were 
a  multitude  ;  and  that  a  number  of  watchers  commanded,  and  a  number  of  holy  ones 
asked  on  behalf  of  the  tree  :  God  shewed  him  this  that  he  might  know  that  both  matters 
were  by  command  of  the  Almighty  Creator;  both  Nebuchadnezzar's  personal  calamity, 
and  the  preservation  of  the  kingdom  for  him  till  he  returned  from  the  wilderness. 

Hew  down  the  oak  means  removing  him  from  mankind :  out  off  its  branches 
refers  to  the  cutting  off  of  his  armies.  Even  with  a  band  of  iron  and  brass 
refers  to  his  being  among  the  animals  during  that  period,  like  a  man  bound,  unable  to 
move  hither  or  thither,  and  remaining  with  the  wild  beasts.  In  the  tender  grass  of 
the  field  means  that  he  would  live  in  a  place  which  produced  grass  for  him  to  feed 
upon,  and  that  he  would  be  a  graminivorous  not  a  carnivorous  animal. 

With  the  dew  of  heaven  refers  to  his  being  day  and  night  under  heaven,  having 
no  shelter  to  take  refuge  in  from  the  dew. 

Let  his  heart  be  changed  refers  to  the  cessation  of  his  reason,  and  his  becoming 
deprived  of  the  power  of  discrimination  which  he  had. 

Three  things,  it  is  to  be  observed,  are  literal :  (1)  grass  like  an  ox,  etc. ;  (2)  let  it 
be  wet  with  the  dew  of  heaven ;  (3)  let  his  heart  be  changed ;  the  rest  are  all 
symbolical. 

And  let  seven  times  pass  over  him  :  some  persons  have  thought  these  '  times ' 
mean  *  seasons,'  making  a  total  of  less  than  two  years  ;  others,  that  they  were  *  years,' 
which  is  more  probable;  the  period  apparently  was  extended,  and  the  Creator 
humiliated  him.  Then  the  angel  states  that  all  this  had  come  upon  him  that  he  might 
know  that  the  kingdom  is  God's,  and  that  He  gives  it  to  whom  He  will,  though  he  be 
the  lowest  of  the  people  (ver.  17).  This  shews  that  his  heart  was  swollen,  and  that  he 
had  clothed  himself  in  pride  :  and  that  God  had  humbled  him  in  consequence,  that  he 
might  realize  that  God  Almighty  is  Monarch  in  His  world,  and  does  therein  what  He 
will,  as  is  explained  in  the  following  chapter.  Then  he  proceeds  to  the  third  portion, 
and  whereas  they  commanded,  whereas  thou  heardest  it  said  '  leave  the  stump  of 
the  roots  of  the  tree,'  the  meaning  thereof  is  that  the  kingdom  remaineth  for  thee,  and 
shall  not  be  taken  away  from  thee.  Then  after  he  had  interpreted  the  dream  he  pro- 
ceeded to  give  him  counsel,  which  he  had  only  to  follow  to  avert  the  threat. 


IV.  32.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  23 

24.  This  points  to  his  having  tyrannized  over  the  people  (cp.  Ezek.  vii.  1 1 ;  Jer. 
xxi.35) ;  he  may  have  made  heavy  demands  from  them  or  enacted  cruel  laws.  The  words 
by  shewing  mercy  to  the  poor  refer  to  hard-heartedness  on  his  part  towards  the 
weak :  by  whom  some  have  thought  that  the  weak  Israelite  nation  is  intended,  since 
apparently  he  was  more  furious  against  them  than  any  others.  Now  these  are  two 
great  offences  committed  by  unbelievers  for  which  God  punishes  in  this  world ;  thus 
he  destroyed  the  generation  of  the  Flood  on  their  account  (Gen.  vi.  13),  and  so  too  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah,  and  so  too  the  people  of  Nineveh  till  they  repented  (Jonah  iii.  8). 

So  there  shall  be  a  lengthening  of  thy  tranquillity :  i.e.  God  will  divert  it  from 
thee  for  a  time,  as  he  diverted  the  disaster  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah.  God  would  bring 
it  upon  him  owing  to  his  oppression  and  tyranny :  but  if  he  mended  his  ways,  God 
would  divert  it  from  him :  it  will  be  according  to  the  sentence  of  the  watchers, 
if  thou  remainest  in  all  thy  sins. 

25.  This  verse  is  not  part  of  Daniel's  address  to  the  king,  but  an  observation  of  the 
writer,  informing  us  that  Nebuchadnezzar  did  not  accept  Daniel's  counsel,  and 
therefore  that  which  the  dream  symbolized  overtook  him. 

26.  27.  This  saying  only  was  not  the  cause  of  what  happened  to  him,  but  his 
continuance  in  his  guilt  and  transgression.  God  gave  him  a  year's  grace  from  the 
time  that  he  saw  the  dream  :  but  as  he  did  not  repent,  and  this  saying  was  added 
thereunto,  God  delayed  his  punishment  no  longer.  It  happened  that  he  had  gone  up 
to  the  roof  of  the  palace  and  looked  down  over  the  city,  and  observed  the  beauty  of 
its  buildings,  till  he  said  Is  not  this  great  Babylon  ?  which  shews  that  he  had 
rebuilt  it  after  his  own  fancy  to  make  it  his  capital ;  and  all  his  stores  were  therein, 
whence  the  words  for  the  might  of  my  power,  etc. 

28,  29.  The  voice  which  he  heard  was  from  heaven  ;  possibly  no  one  heard  it  save 
he ;  or  possibly  others  did  hear  it,  the  voice  being  loud  that  mankind  in  general  might 
know  this. 

30.  Doubtless  as  soon  as  he  heard  this  voice  which  descended  from  the  heavens 
reach  him,  his  reason  stopped,  and  he  fell  down  from  his  palace-roof,  and  went  blindly 
forward,  and  was  guided  by  the  Creator  into  the  wilderness ;  he  was  not  stopped, 
especially  as  his  story  was  known,  and  Daniel  had  told  them  about  it,  so  that  they  did 
not  attend  to  him. 

Till  his  hair  was  grown  points  to  the  length  of  his  sojourn,  which  was  seven 
years. 

31,  32.  At  the  end  of  the  seven  times  his  reason  returned  to  him,  and  he  found 
himself  among  the  wild  beasts  in  the  wilderness,  and  perceived  the  state  of  his  body, 
the  mass  of  his  hair  and  the  length  of  his  nails,  and  realized  that  there  had  come  upon 
him  all  that  had  been  told  him.  After  that  he  raised  his  eyes  to  heaven  and  spoke  as 
above. 

His  kingdom  is  an  everlasting  kingdom,  inasmuch  as  the  kingdom  of  men 
and  their  dominion  ceases  and  terminates. 

And  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  :  the  great  and  the  little  alike  are  counted 


24  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [IV.  33. 

as  nothing ;  since  they  come  to  an  end  and  die  :  and  in  this  sense  the  verse  will  refer 
to  ordinary  people,  and  their  general  condition.  The  prophets  and  saints  however  are 
the  pillars  of  the  world.  If  Nebuchadnezzar  refers  to  death  and  the  termination  of 
man's  career,  then  it  is  a  general  sentiment ;  but  if  it  refers  to  rank  and  power,  then 
the  prophets  and  saints  are  not  included. 

And  He  doeth  according  to  His  will  in  the  army  of  heaven :  i.e.  either 
the  angels  ;  or  the  stars,  which  eclipse,  blacken,  and  fall. 

And  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  :  here  too  he  may  refer  to  mankind, — 
whom  God  slayeth  and  maketh  alive,  enricheth  and  maketh  poor — or  it  may  include 
all  the  animals. 

And  none  :  including  the  host  of  heaven  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth. 

Can  strike  upon  His  hand  :  i.  e.  upon  God's  hand  ;  or  perhaps  on  his  own  hand, 
to  warn  Him  off.  The  first  is  more  probable.  None  among  the  host  of  heaven  and 
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  can  stay  Him  from  His  will,  or  express  displeasure  at  His 
work,  saying  to  Him,  'What  is  the  work  that  Thou  hast  done?  It  is  not  fair'  (cp. 
Eccles.  viii.  4).  He  notices  this  because  it  corresponds  with  his  own  case ;  since  he 
had  been  unable  to  impede  God's  dealings  with  himself,  or  be  displeased  thereat,  for 
He  had  been  just  in  His  work;  Daniel  had  warned  him,  but  he  had  not  taken  his 
advice ;  and  so  earned  all  that  happened  to  him. 

33.  He  said  above  (ver.  31)  mine  understanding  returned  imto  me  in  order  to 
annex  to  it  and  I  blessed  the  Most  High ;  here  he  repeats  it  to  tell  us  how  he 
returned  and  was  established  in  his  sovereignty  and  his  glory.  Daniel  had  said 
to  him  thy  kingdom  shall  be  sure  imto  thee,  assuring  him  that  he  would  certainly 
return  to  his  throne. 

My  counsellors  and  my  lords  sought  unto  me  :  Daniel  had  reckoned  up 
the  times,  and  when  they  were  full,  he  commanded  the  army  and  the  nobles  to  go  out 
after  him,  and  to  disperse  in  different  regions  to  seek  him,  till  they  found  him  seeking 
the  inhabited  world,  and  took  him  and  brought  him  back. 

And  excellent  greatness  :  he  was  not  humiliated  in  their  eyes  when  the 
disaster  had  fallen  upon  him,  but  on  the  contrary,  they  gave  him  increased  might  and 
majesty.  This  was  because  he  dealt  justly  with  the  people,  and  gave  up  oppression, 
wrong,  and  tyranny.  Fear  of  him  was  in  consequence  put  into  the  hearts  of  men,  and 
he  increased  in  power  and  glory.  The  Scripture  does  not  tell  us  how  the  world  fared 
during  these  seven  times  without  a  king  to  govern.  Some  say  Daniel  governed 
the  kingdom;  others  that  the  king's  son  Evil  sat  on  the  throne  till  the  return  of 
the  father. 

37.  Just  as  if  he  had  been  reading  out  to  them  this  section  from  the  beginning  till 
this  place,  in  copies  transmitted  to  them,  he  finishes  with  the  words  '  I  bless  and  exalt 
the  blessed  Creator  for  all  His  works.' 

This  is  the  end  of  the  history  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  Then  he  proceeds  to  tell  us  the 
history  of  Belshazzar,  his  grandson  ;  the  history  of  his  son  Evil  Merodach  is  omitted, 
because  no  act  was  done  by  him  like  those  done  by  his  father  and  his  son  Belshazzar. 


V.  7.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  25 

Of  Evil  Merodach  we  only  hear  of  the  kindness  that  he  shewed  to  Jehoiakin. 
Probably  he  was  the  best  of  them. 

V. 

1.  Belshazzar  reigned  three  years  at  the  least ;  and  he  made  this  feast  quite  at  the 
end  of  the  time  (ver.  3,  inf.).  The  book  does  not  explain  the  reason  for  which  the 
feast  was  made.  Possibly  he  had  counted  the  seventy  years  which  God  had 
appointed  them ;  and  when  he  saw  that  the  seventy  years  were  completed,  and  the 
kingdom  remained  unchanged,  he  made  the  feast  out  of  joy  thereat,  thinking  that  all 
that  had  been  said  had  fallen  to  the  ground  :  and  this  was  why  he  ventured  to  take 
the  vessels  of  the  house  of  God  which  Nebuchadnezzar  his  father  had  put  away,  and 
abstained  from  employing ;  when  Belshazzar  saw  the  seventy  years  completed  and  the 
kingdom  remaining,  he  said,  '  These  vessels  are  mine  and  there  is  no  return  : '  so  he 
began  to  praise  his  gods,  in  whom  he  now  believed,  wherein  he  was  too  hasty  ;  and, 
indeed,  this  was  one  of  the  causes  of  his  ruin.  He  did  not  invite  any  besides  the 
nobles,  their  attendants  and  followers ;  who,  he  tells  us,  were  a  thousand  souls. 
And  drank  wine  before  the  thousand  :  they  were  in  his  hall,  and  he  drank  in 
their  presence. 

2.  WhUe  he  tasted  the  wine  :  some  make  this  mean  that  his  intoxication  excited 
him  to  this,  whereas,  had  he  been  sober  he  would  not  have  done  so,  but  would  have 
refrained  from  bringing  them  out  and  drinking  out  of  them  ;  others,  that  while  the  wine 
was  pleasant  to  him,  he  wished  to  drink  out  of  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  God,  these 
being  vessels  fit  to  drink  out  of,  such  as  *  cups '  and  '  bowls,'  etc. 

Vessels  of  gold  and  silver  in  ver.  2 ;  in  ver.  3  the  silver  is  omitted :  either  for 
brevity ;  there  being  no  doubt,  if  the  gold  were  brought,  that  the  silver  would  be 
brought  too ;  or  he  may  have  ordered  them  to  be  brought,  and  afterwards  preferred 
the  gold  exclusively.  Then  they  praised  the  god[s]  of  the  images ;  and  did  not  praise 
the  blessed  Creator,  despising  Him  in  their  hearts,  and  thinking  that  they  were 
masters  of  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  God ;  and  just  then  came  the  term  which  God 
had  fixed. 

5.  The  fingers  of  a  hand :  this  shews  that  he  saw  a  hand  appear,  but  did  not 
see  the  arm,  or  the  person ;  so,  too,  Ezekiel  (viii.  3)  saw  a  hand  only ;  and  likewise 
Daniel  on  a  later  occasion  (x.  7). 

On  the  plaister  of  the  wall  of  the  palace :  referring  to  the  white  plaister ; 
the  writing  was  black,  so  that  it  shewed  :  and  the  king  saw  it  alone  of  those  who  were 
in  the  hall,  just  as  Nebuchadnezzar  only  saw  Hananiah,  Mishael,  Azariah,  and  the 
angel. 

6.  When  he  saw  this  miracle,  fear  and  tremor  came  upon  him,  and  ojving  to  the 
greatness  of  his  terror  the  vertebrae  of  his  spine  were  loosened,  and  his  knees  struck 
against  each  other. 

7.  He  immediately  summoned  these  to  tell  him  the  writing  and  its  interpretation ; 
promising  the  person  who  should  read  it,  and  shew  him  the  interpretation,  that  he 

e  [II.  3-] 


26  COMMENTARY  ON  DAN/EL.  [V.8. 

would  clothe  him  in  royal  garments,  and  put  a  gold  chain  about  his  neck,  while  a 
herald  cried  before  him  that  he  was  lord  over  a  third  part  of  the  kingdom.  This 
is  like  what  Pharaoh  did  to  Joseph,  only  he  entrusted  his  affairs  to  Joseph  without 
making  him  a  partner  in  the  kingdom,  whereas  Belshazzar  meant  that  of  all  the  taxes 
that  came  to  him  Daniel  should  have  a  third  part,  and  a  third  in  every  benefit 
which  the  king  enjoyed.  His  grandfather  Nebuchadnezzar  had  made  no  such  offer  to 
the  person  who  should  tell  him  his  dream  and  its  interpretation,  but  had  merely 
offered  presents,  rewards,  and  dignities,  inferior  to  the  sovereignty.  This  was  because 
this  matter  made  more  impression  on  Belshazzar  than  the  other  had  made,  and 
because  of  the  fright,  fear,  and  impatience  that  had  seized  him. 

8.  The  writing  was  not  unlike  any  existing  writing ;  on  the  contrary,  it  was  an 
existing  character,  whether  Hebrew  or  some  other.  The  answer  (to  the  problem)  is 
that  the  letters  were  not  arranged  in  order,  but  inverted,  the  letters  of  WD  being 
arranged  D3K :  and  similarly  all  the  letters  of  the  four  words  were  transposed. 
Hence  they  did  not  understand  them :  and,  when  they  read  them,  they  got  no 
intelligible  word,  much  less  its  interpretation.  And  his  heart  was  nigh  breaking 
thereat,  so  that  when  Daniel,  after  the  others  had  failed,  read  it  and  interpreted  it,  he 
was  able  to  address  him  as  he  did  in  presence  of  the  throng,  and  explain  to  him  his 
sin  and  the  wickedness  of  his  conduct,  as  described  at  the  outset  of  the  chapter. 

9.  He  had  hoped  that  his  wise  men  would  understand  it,  and  tell  him  its 
interpretation :  so  when  they  did  not  understand  it,  his  horror  increased  and  his 
colour  changed.  It  is  not  improbable  that  he  saw  the  hand  while  the  others  did  not 
see  it,  and  that  on  account  of  this  they  were  astonished  and  confounded  when  he  said, 
*  Ye  peoples,  lo,  I  see  a  great  hand  which  has  written  this,  and  lo,  terror  confounds  me !' 

la  This  queen  was  his  grandmother,  wife  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  was  acquainted 
with  these  matters  from  their  beginning. 

By  reason  of  the  affairs  of  the  king  :  this  refers  to  the  terror  and  fright  that 
had  seized  the  king,  and  the  change  of  the  expression  of  his  face,  and  the  bewilder- 
ment of  his  nobles,  and  [the  fears]  that  had  fallen  on  them  on  the  king's  account, 
whence  their  joy  had  been  changed  into  this  plight.  Her  heart  pained  her  on  his 
account,  since  he  was  her  son's  son,  now  that  this  trouble  had  fallen  upon  him, 
and  she  feared  that  he  might  die  of  the  fright  which  had  beset  his  heart ;  at  any  rate 
that  he  would  not  rest  till  there  came  the  person  who  had  power  to  read  to  him 
the  writing  and  understand  its  interpretation. 

II.  She  informs  him  that  there  is  present  in  the  city  Daniel,  who  will  read  the 
writing,  and  interpret  it  to  him  ;  that  he  might  cease  from  [the  terror]  that  had  fallen 
upon  him.  Then  she  began  to  recount  to  him  some  details  of  Daniel's  wisdom,  and 
how  he  was  above  all  his  father's  wise  men,  having  been  the  most  eminent  of  them, 
that  he  might  be  convinced  in  his  mind  that  Daniel  would  understand  that,  and 
a  more  difficult  thing  too.  The  most  probable  account  of  this  matter  is  that  Daniel 
had  never  come  before  him,  and  had  never  known  him  at  all,  having  been  absent  from 
Babylon  during  this  year  (see  on  viii.  i) ;   after  which  he  returned,  very  probably 


V.  i8.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  27 

for  this  very  purpose,  providentially.  Next  she  described  Daniel  to  him  that  he 
might  know  him  and  his  skill. 

In  verse  ii  she  ascribed  to  him  four  characteristics:  (i)  spirit  of  the  gods; 
(2)  light ;  (3)  understanding ;  (4)  wisdom.  In  the  next  verse  she  repeats  some 
of  them  in  the  same  words,  and  others  with  a  change  of  expression.  Probably  an 
excellent  spirit  means  the  same  as  spirit  of  the  holy  gods ;  knowledge  is  the 
explanation  of  wisdom  like  the  wisdom  of  the  gods ;  interpreting  of  dreams  the 
specification  of  light ;  this  word  1'^^^J  may  either  mean  '  that  which  is  correct ' 
according  to  the  Hebrew,  or  *  light '  according  to  the  Aramaic  (cp.  ii.  22) ;  meaning 
that  he  can  shew  up  hidden  things,  which  are  as  it  were  in  dark  places,  so  that  they 
can  be  seen  and  understood. 

An  excellent  spirit :  referring  to  his  inspiration,  the  like  of  which  was  not  to  be 
found  among  the  wise  men  of  Babylon. 

Knowledge  :  the  philosophical  sciences,  as  in  i.  4. 

Understanding :  reasoning  power. 

Interpreting  of  dreams :  referring  to  difficult  dreams,  as  happened  to  him  when 
he  explained  the  tree  (chap.  iv). 

Shewing  of  dark  sentences  :  this  is  not  illustrated  in  the  book  ;  '  dark  sentences ' 
are,  in  the  language  of  the  philosophers,  striking  sayings  constructed  in  language  made 
up  of  hints,  like  Samson's  riddle. 

12.  Dissolving  of  knots :  a  form  of  expression  which  is  thought  to  be  simple, 
but  which  the  wise  man  can  analyse  into  its  parts.  She  added  that  his  grandfather 
had  set  him  above  all  his  wise  men  because  these  qualities  were  united  in  him  ;  and 
that  he  also  called  him  by  the  name  of  his  god  on  that  account. 

13.  The  queen  had  not  told  him  that  Daniel  was  of  the  Jews.  Possibly  he  asked 
those  present  about  him,  and  they  told  him  so.  This  remark  of  Belshazzar  was  not 
meant  contemptuously  at  such  a  time  :  he  must  have  said  it  to  him  because  the  Jews 
were  famous  for  prophecy  and  the  divine  sciences. 

16.  He  said  in  the  first  verse  (14)  'that  a  spirit  of  the  gods  and  light  and  prudence;'  in 
the  second  (this  verse)  he  adds  *  solutions '  also,  according  to  what  the  queen  had  stated. 

17.  He  would  not  accept  any  of  the  things  he  mentioned  for  several  reasons. 
First,  because  he  did  not  want  his  favours,  which  were  not  proportionate,  but  dictated 
by  ignorance  and  insolence.  Secondly,  because  they  were  honours  which  would  be 
annulled  at  once.  Thirdly,  that  it  might  not  be  said  that  he  had  interpreted  it 
for  the  sake  of  what  he  was  going  to  get.  He  said,  *  I  will  not  take  from  thee,  so, 
if  thou  wilt  give,  give  some  one  else,  whom  thou  mayest  choose.  I  will  read  the 
writing  and  tell  thee  the  interpretation  thereof:  that  only  is  thy  desire  and  thy 
request.' 

18-22.  He  prefixes  this  introduction  to  shew  him  that  he  was  not  greater  than 
his  grandfather,  who  had  reached  in  sovereignty  and  power  and  terror  and  majesty 
a  height  which  his  grandson  had  not  reached :  yet,  when  he  grew  proud,  and  put 
on  the  garb  of  tyranny,  the  Creator  humbled  him  to  a  degree  beyond  which  there 

e  2 


28  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [V.  22. 

was  no  further  degradation ;  and  that  God  raises  the  humble,  and  humbles  the 
proud,  and  slays  mighty  kings,  and  does  whatever  else  He  will,  none  being  able  to 
oppose  Him,  or  thwart  His  will. 

22.  Though  thou  knewest  all  this:  shewing  that  Belshazzar  knew  all  that 
had  happened  to  his  grandfather,  so  that  he  should  have  taken  warning  thereby. 
He  then  tells  him  that  his  seizure  of  the  vessels  of  God's  house  was  presumption 
towards  Him  and  contempt  of  Him  in  his  soul.  Then  Daniel  looked  towards  the 
hall  and  the  people  therein,  and  saw  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  God,  and  how 
they  had  been  used  for  drinking;  and  told  him  how  they  had  been  praising  their 
gods,  and  had  not  praised  God  Almighty  as  was  His  due,  but  had  praised  instead 
the  idols  which  can  do  nothing,  being  mere  images  and  semblances.  Then  after 
shewing  him  the  inferiority  of  his  gods,  and  his  folly  and  audacity,  he  said  to  him, 
*  On  account  of  this  the  author  of  this  writing  was  sent.' 

24-27.  He  tells  him  that  on  account  of  his  action,  as  described,  the  angel  had 
been  sent  and  had  written  these  four  words.  He  then  combined  the  fifteen  letters 
into  words,  saying  number  twice ;  the  first  referring  to  the  number  of  seventy 
years  which  God  had  appointed  for  Nebuchadnezzar,  his  son,  and  his  son's  son 
(Jer.  xxvii.  7),  the  second  to  the  reign  of  Belshazzar.  He  had  numbered  to  them 
three  kings  and  seventy  years  ;  when  these  were  completed,  they  had  nothing  more 
left.  Tekel  he  interprets  thou  art  weighed;  implying  that  one  who  is  wanting 
cannot  be  taken,  but  only  one  who  is  full  weight ;  i.  e.  whose  intelligence,  wisdom, 
piety,  etc.  are  so ;  now  in  his  father  and  grandfather  there  had  been  a  certain 
number  of  laudable  characteristics,  but  in  him  there  were  none,  all  his  qualities 
being  wanting.  Pharsin  he  interprets  fragments,  comparing  him  to  a  thing  that 
is  broken,  wherein  nothing  serviceable  is  left ;  referring  to  the  destruction  of  all 
his  supporters  in  the  kingdom,  and  his  own  murder.  This  is  why  Pharsin  is  in 
the  plural ;  signifying  his  own  destruction,  i.  e.  death,  and  afterwards  the  destruction 
after  him  of  all  the  supporters  of  the  Chaldean  rule.  Then  he  informed  him  that 
that  rule  would  be  transferred  to  the  Medes  and  Persians. 

.29.  The  king's  promise  had  necessarily  to  be  fulfilled,  and  Daniel  could  not 
resist,  though  he  knew  that  this  sovereignty  was  transitory. 

30.  Darius  knew  that  a  word  spoken  by  Daniel  would  be  fulfilled,  and  that  the 
kingdom  was  destined  for  the  Medes  and  Persians.  It  may  be  that  Daniel  had 
told  him  that  he  and  no  other  would  be  king,  whence  he  was  encouraged  to  kill 
Belshazzar.  Or  he  may  have  been  killed  by  some  of  his  servants,  since  the 
Scripture  does  not  record  who  the  murderer  was. 

31.  Beceived  the  kingdom:  i.e.  received  it  from  the  Chaldees  ;  cp.  inf.  ix.  i. 
We  are  not  told  how  he  was  established  in  the  sovereignty,  nor  how  he  became 
seated  in  Babylon  on  the  royal  throne;  but  the  writer  tells  us  that  Darius  was 
born  in  the  year  in  which  Nebuchadnezzar  took  captive  Jehoiakin  king  of  Judah, 
to  shew  that  in  the  very  year  in  which  he  did  so  much  in  Jerusalem,  and  won  so 
great  a  victory,  God  raised  up  one  against  him,  who  should  take  his   kingdom 


VI.  9.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  29 

/rom  him.  For  this  reason  we  are  given  the  number  of  his  years  at  the  time  of 
his  receiving  the  kingdom  from  the  Chaldees.  Since  there  was  no  purpose  in 
telling  us  the  age  of  any  other  of  the  kings  of  the  Gentiles  or  of  the  Israelites  [?]  at 
the  time  of  their  coming  to  the  throne,  it  is  nowhere  else  given. 

VI. 

1-3.  Darius  was  certain  that  the  kingdom  was  established  in  his  hands,  and 
that  he  had  not  to  march  out  to  fight  opponents.  He  appointed  therefore  these 
hundred  and  twenty  governors,  to  each  of  whom  belonged  a  particular  province, 
wherein  he  left  a  viceroy,  while  he  himself  remained  with  the  king  in  the  capital. 
And  he  appointed  three  presidents,  to  whose  word  and  command  they  were  to  refer  ; 
and  he  appointed  the  hundred  and  twenty  that  they  might  govern  the  kingdom,  and 
the  king  might  not  have  to  be  fatigued  with  all  the  business.  This  is  the  same 
sort  of  plan  as  Pharaoh  adopted,  when  he  appointed  Joseph  to  govern  the  kingdom, 
giving  himself  up  to  amusement,  and  retaining  merely  the  title, 

3.  With  n^B'V  cp.  Jonah  i.  6  and  Ps.  cxlvi.  4.  He  set  the  three  over  the  hundred  and 
twenty,  and  Daniel,  who  was  one  of  the  three,  over  both  the  governors  and  the  presi- 
dents, so  that  none  of  them  could  do  anything  save  by  his  consent  or  command.  He 
did  this,  because  an  excellent  spirit  was  in  him.  He  was  never  found  incompetent, 
nor  his  orders  and  counsels  false.  So  the  king  was,  observe,  planning  to  remove 
the  others,  and  establish  Daniel  by  himself ;  i.  e.  it  was  not  practicable  for  him  to 
establish  Daniel  at  once ;  such  a  matter,  he  knew,  required  gentle  strategy.  So 
he  went  to  the  chief  nobles  of  the  empire,  and  did  not  remove  them  from  their 
high  station  till  his  sovereignty  was  established.  When  it  was  established  he  began 
to  plot  and  to  plan  to  remove  them  little  by  little ;  and  when  they  perceived  this 
they  began  to  plot  to  remove  him  from  the  kingdom  altogether. 

4.  The  presidents  and  governors  agreed  together  by  reason  of  the  envy  of  him 
which  had  penetrated  their  hearts.  The  king,  they  said,  has  only  exalted  him 
above  us  owing  to  the  excellence  of  his  counsel ;  so  we  must  plan  some  device  to 
convince  the  king  of  some  error  or  shortcoming  on  his  part,  that  he  may  remove 
him  from  the  sovereignty  altogether.  They  sought,  he  says,  for  an  error,  but  could 
not  find  one. 

Error  or  mischief:  'error'  means  oppression  of  the  subjects.  'Mischief,' 
wrong  done  in  reference  to  the  king,  or  wasting  the  revenue. 

5.  Despairing  of  finding  a  means  of  attack  on  the  side  of  the  king,  they  thought 
they  would  attain  their  will  in  respect  of  him  in  the  matter  of  the  worship  of  his 
Lord.  Their  object  and  intention  therein  was  not  to  endeavour  to  shew  that  he 
neglected  any  of  his  religious  duties,  but  of  another  sort.  » 

7-9.  Have  consulted,  together  :  indicating  that  they  had  assembled  and  con- 
sulted about  a  measure  which  could  establish  the  king  in  his  sovereignty,  so  that 
the  people  would  obey  him ;  and  that  it  was  necessary  that  this  should  be  done, 
and  if  the  king  failed  to  do  it,  his  kingdom  would  become  insecure.    They  bound 


30  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [VI.  ii. 

themselves  to  this,  in  order  that  Daniel  might  not  be  able  to  serve  God,  which 
was  their  real  object,  which  object  the  king  did  not  know  :  which  was  part  of 
their  treachery  against  him  ;  for  had  the  king  known,  he  would  not  have  agreed 
to  their  counsel  nor  accepted  it,  nor  set  his  signature.  Then  they  said  to  him, 
'Set  thy  signature  that  it  may  be  read  to  the  people  in  the  streets  and  in  the 
assemblies,  that  none  of  them  may  oppose  it.'  They  included  in  their  phrase  that 
every  man  the  followers  of  every  religion,  not  confining  the  law  to  religions  other 
than  their  own ; — a  stroke  of  policy,  to  make  it  apply  to  Daniel.  They  appointed 
it  for  the  space  of  thirty  days,  to  make  it  last  long;  that  being  with  them  the 
utmost  space  for  which  they  could  remain  without  worship  of  their  deity.  Had 
that  not  been  allowed  by  their  religion,  he  would  not  have  enacted  it.  They  also 
forbade  people  to  make  any  request  of  each  other,  as  they  had  forbidden  them  to 
make  any  of  God ;  but  their  object  was  only  the  latter.  This  they  did  that  none 
besides  themselves  might  know  their  object.  Then  they  excepted  the  king  for  two 
reasons.  First,  because  it  was  absolutely  necessary;  since  otherwise  the  nation 
would  have  perished  from  mutual  outrages  and  difficulties  that  would  arise. 
Secondly,  they  exalted  the  king  above  all  gods  to  magnify  his  estate.  All  this  was 
to  shew  him  that  by  this  statute  his  kingdom  would  be  confirmed  and  set  in  order. 
When  the  king  saw  that  they  were  agreed  about  it,  it  was  clear  to  him  that,  unless 
he  did  that  on  which  they  were  agreed,  his  power  would  be  shaken.  So  he  did 
it.  He  did  not  take  Daniel's  opinion  beforehand,  because  they  had  told  him  that 
it  was  a  part  of  the  administration  wherein  Daniel  had  absolutely  no  concern. 

11.  Daniel  may  have  known  what  was  in  their  minds,  and  their  purpose,  i.e. 
that  he  and  no  other  was  their  mark  ;  and  he  knew  too  what  the  king  had  done. 
But  he  did  not  tell  the  king,  committing  the  business  to  the  Creator  of  all.  He 
mentions  the  windows,  because  they  looked  in  at  him  through  them,  and  surprised 
him,  and  behold  he  was  praying. 

Towards  Jerusalem. :  this  does  not  mean  that  the  windows  were  opened 
towards  Jerusalem,  but  rather  that  he  stood  facing  Jerusalem,  the  Qiblah. 

As  he  did  aforetime :  shewing  that  it  was  not  a  thing  which  he  commenced 
then ;  it  implies  that  he  had  habitually  done  so,  and  that  it  is  an  obligatory  duty 
which  cannot  be  neglected.  The  three  times  probably  mean  evening,  morning, 
and  midday.  From  the  words  he  kneeled  upon  his  knees  we  learn  that  that  is 
one  condition  of  prayer  (cp.  Ps.  xcv.  6). 

12.  Doubtless  he  had  perceived  that  they  had  come  to  see  him;  he  did  not, 
however,  interrupt  his  prayer,  but  continued  till  the  end,  so  that  when  they  came 
down  upon  him  he  was  still  praying.    These  men  were  the  governors  and  presidents. 

13  (12).  His  answer,  the  thing  is  true,  means  *it  is  so,'  and  none  may  transgress 
it ;  whoever  transgresses  shall  be  cast  into  the  den  of  lions.  When  they  heard 
this  saying  of  the  king,  and  had  reminded  him  of  his  decree,  they  proceeded. 

14  (13).  Of  the  children  of  the  captivity  :  contemptuous,  indicating  that  he  was 
of  the  vilest  of  the  people :   *  yet  thou  hast  raised  him  above  them  all,  and  he  has 


VI,  20.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  31 

opposed  thy  edict,  and  loosed  that  wherewith  thou  hast  bound  the  nation.'  And 
they  desired  the  king  after  this  speech  to  order  that  he  be  thrown  into  the  den  of 
lions. 

15.  When  he  heard  them  say  that  the  violator  of  the  decree  was  Daniel,  he 
perceived  that  they  had  laid  the  plot  against  him :  so  he  began  to  make  excuses 
for  Daniel ;  such  as  that  he  did  not  count  as  one  of  the  multitude  to  whom  the 
prohibition  applied  :  *  since  he  is  the  ruler  of  the  kingdom,  and  the  persons  intended 
were  others.'  This  and  similar  things  he  kept  saying  to  them  till  sunset,  opposing 
their  proposition  and  excusing  Daniel.  Some  have  supposed  that  he  said  to  them, 
*  Daniel  cannot  have  known  what  was  written ;  had  he  heard  of  it,  he  would  not 
have  disobeyed  our  decree.'  But  when  the  sun  set,  Daniel  rose  and  prayed,  so  that 
the  king  had  no  longer  any  excuse  for  him, 

16.  In  other  words :  *  If  Daniel  be  not  cast  into  the  lions'  den,  the  rule  of  the 
Medes  and  Persians  will  have  been  broken ;  now  if  it  can  be  broken  in  Daniel's 
case,  it  can  be  broken  in  other  cases ;  and  this  is  a  principle  which  will  extend 
itself;  and  ruin  will  be  the  result.'  Their  meaning  was,  that  if  the  king  altered 
their  laws  they  would  revolt  from  him,  seeing  that  it  was  quite  impossible  that  one 
who  altered  their  laws  should  be  king  over  them. 

17.  Darius'  language  is  very  different  from  that  of  Nebuchadnezzar  (sup.  iii.  15). 
Darius  believed  in  God's  power  to  deliver  in  some  miraculous  manner,  whereas 
Nebuchadnezzar  believed  in  no  such  power.  Those  who  threw  the  victims  in  that 
case  into  the  furnace  were  killed  by  the  sparks  of  fire,  because  they  were  close  by 
it.  Those  who  threw  Daniel  into  the  den  of  lions  did  not  suffer  in  the  same 
way,  the  lions  being  far  away  from  them.  Darius  said  to  Daniel  at  the  moment 
of  his  being  thrown  in,  'Doubtless  the  God  whom  thou  servest  continually  will 
save  thee  from  the  lions,  since  He  is  able  to  do  this ;  and  those  who  have  plotted 
against  thee  will  not  see  their  will  accomplished  upon  thee.' 

18.  Probably  the  den  had  a  door,  whereby  the  lions  were  introduced;  and  also 
a  mouth,  by  which  their  food  was  thrown  to  them  to  eat,  when  there  was  no  man 
thrown.  And  it  was  these  people's  duty  when  any  man  had  merited  death  to 
throw  him  to  the  lions  to  eat.  It  was  Nebuchadnezzar's  way  to  kill  by  fire,  and 
of  the  rest  to  kill  by  the  sword. 

That  there  might  be  no  change  of  purpose :  he  means  lest,  when  they  saw 
that  the  lions  did  not  harm  him,  they  might  themselves  throw  stones  upon  him 
and  kill  him ;  since  they  now  dealt  openly  with  him.  And  the  king  did  this  because 
he  knew  that  God  Almighty  would  deliver  him  ;  otherwise  he  would  not  have 
sealed  the  stone  which  was  at  the  top  of  the  pit. 

19.  niD  is  the  Chaldee  for  the  Heb.  B>N  vX.  His  heart  was  on  fircj  he  means, 
concerning  Daniel,  so  that  he  refused  music  and  pleasure.  And  through  his  spirit 
being  occupied  with  him,  he  thought  much  concerning  him,  and  his  sleep  fled,  so 
that  he  got  no  rest  till  dawn. 

20  sqq.   He  arose  at  dawn,  his  spirit  being  occupied  with  him ;  then  he  called 


32  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [VI.  24. 

to  him  that  he  might  let  his  voice  be  heard,  and  delight  his  heart  with  [an  assurance 
of]  his  safety. 

My  God  hath  sent  His  angel :  to  be  taken  literally.  God  Almighty  sent  His 
angel  to  deliver  him,  as  He  sent  His  angel  to  Hananiah,  Mishael,  and  Azariah. 
Although  the  lions  were  hungry.  He  allowed  them  no  means  of  harming  him. 

For  as  much  as  before  Him  innocency :  referring  to  his  righteous  conduct  in 
matters  between  himself  and  God  generally,  and  also  to  what  was  said  above,  ver.  4. 

And  also  before  thee,  O  king,  I  have  done  no  hiirt :  indicating  that  he  had 
done  nothing  whereby  he  had  earned  this  treatment. 

24.  They  let  down  ropes,  as  was  done  in  the  case  of  Jeremiah. 

25.  These  men  were  the  hundred  and  twenty-two  who  had  plotted  against  him ; 
and  every  one  who  had  displayed  any  hatred  towards  Daniel  they  included  with  them : 
also  their  sons  and  wives ;  because  it  was  the  rule  by  the  Persian  law  to  include 
the  women  and  children  with  the  men;  or  perhaps  their  wives  and  their  grown- 
up sons  had  displayed  some  joy  at  Daniel's  misfortune  and  hatred  towards  him, 
and  so  had  earned  their  fate  in  the  king's  mind.  Probably  they  threw  them 
down  in  parties  according  to  the  number  of  the  lions,  each  lion  getting  one;  and 
when  they  saw  that  he  had  devoured  him,  they  produced  another  till  they  had 
devoured  them  all.  Then  Daniel  returned  to  the  administration  of  the  kingdom 
by  himself,  as  the  king  had  originally  intended  (ver.  3).  Doubtless  the  king's  written 
statute  must  have  held  good  till  the  end  of  the  thirty  days,  except  [for]  Daniel 
and  those  who,  like  him,  were  worshippers  of  God  Almighty. 

26  sqq.  Darius  acted  as  Nebuchadnezzar  had  done,  when  he  returned  from  the 
wilderness  to  his  throne,  in  circulating  letters,  recounting  what  had  happened  to 
him.  He  felt  bound  to  magnify  the  blessed  Creator  and  pubUsh  His  miracles ;  and 
to  command  mankind  to  fear  Him ;  He  being  the  eternal  God,  Whose  kingdom  and 
prevailing  sovereignty  never  cease ;  and  the  Saviour  and  Deliverer  of  whom  He  will. 

Doing  signs  and  wonders  in  heaven  and  earth :  signs  in  the  heavenly  hosts, 
such  as  eclipses,  etc. ;  and  in  earth,  such  as  took  place  in  the  history  of  Daniel 
and  his  companions.  Darius  himself  had  witnessed  this,  and  knew  it.  Then  he 
informed  them  how  Daniel  had  been  cast  into  the  lions'  den,  and  had  not  been 
hurt ;  doubtless  people  already  knew  what  had  been  done  by  the  hundred  and  twenty 
men  till  they  were  thrown  to  the  lions  and  removed  from  office  and  others  appointed 
in  their  stead. 

29.  He  was  in  power  and  office.     (Cp.  i.  ad  fin?) 

So  far  the  history  of  what  happened  to  Nebuchadnezzar,  Belshazzar,  and  Darius. 
The  history  of  Cyrus  and  the  Persian  kings  who  succeeded  him  is  told  in  the 
book  of  Ezra. 

VII. 

1.  He  was  already  acquainted  with  the  facts  about  the  four  kingdoms  contained 
in  Nebuchadnezzar's  dream,  as  explained  by  him ;   after  this,  however,  he  received 


VII.  4.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  33 

fuller  accounts  of  the  same  ;  part  of  which  is  contained  in  the  now  following  dream, 
parts  in  chaps,  viii,  ix,  x ;  in  all  five  chapters.  Now  the  dream  which  Nebuchadnezzar 
saw,  and  this  dream  which  Daniel  saw  mention  all  four  kingdoms.  The  Vision, 
on  the  contrary,  does  not  mention  the  first,  but  only  three.  The  fourth  chapter 
(chap,  ix)  contains  a  summary  history  of  the  Second  Temple,  and  also  a  notice  of 
what  Rome,  the  fourth  kingdom,  did  to  Jerusalem.  The  fifth  chapter  describes 
the  fortunes  of  the  kings  of  Greece,  Rome,  and  Arabia,  etc.,  as  we  shall  explain 
by  God's  help.  These  four  chapters,  composed  by  the  blessed  Daniel,  may  be  thus 
divided :  the  first  consists  of  what  he  saw  in  the  dream  ;  the  second  of  what  he  saw  in 
the  visions  the  third  and  fourth  of  what  he  saw  when  awake j  indicating  the  high 
stage  he  had  reached  in  prophecy.  God  Almighty  revealed  this  to  Daniel  of  all 
mankind,  owing  to  his  anguish  at  our  sufferings,  and  the  interest  he  felt  in  what 
was  going  to  happen  to  us,  and  his  desire  to  know  how  long  the  time  would  be ; 
for  which  reason  he  is  called  the  man  of  desires. 

Then  he  wrote  the  dream :  because  he  desired  that  it  should  have  a  place 
in  the  collection  of  documents  written  by  tL„  blessed  prophets. 

And.  told  the  sum  of  the  matters  :  meaning  either  that  he  wrote  down 
the  important  points  of  the  dream ;  or  else  referring  to  the  heading  words  in  the 
chapter,  Daniel  answered  and  said,  as  they  are  written;  and  meaning  that  the 
events  took  place  just  as  they  are  recorded  in  this  book ;  that  it  might  not  be 
supposed  that  only  part  was  written,  the  dream  being  epitomized  ;  since  the 
prophets  do  sometimes  write  part  [of  a  history]  and  omit  part ;  as  in  the  Books 
of  Kings. 

2,  3.  He  saw  four  winds  stirring  the  great  sea,  i.e.  the  ocean.  And  after  it 
had  been  stirred,  there  rose  from  it  these  four  animals.  Apparently  he  must  have 
fancied  in  the  dream  that  he  was  standing  on  the  sea-shore  till  the  animals  rose. 
Then  he  begins  to  describe  them  one  by  one. 

4-8.  We  must  explain  why  these  kingdoms  are  compared  to  animals,  so  that 
sometimes  they  are  compared  to  horses  (Zech.  vi.  i),  which  are  domestic  animals  ; 
and  similarly  infra  the  king  of  Persia  is  compared  to  a  ram,  and  the  king  of 
Greece  to  a  goat.  In  my  opinion  he  (Zechariah)  compared  the  four  kingdoms  to 
horses,  because  they  are  used  in  war ;  since,  therefore,  each  of  these  kingdoms  was  at 
war  with  some  other,  he  compared  them  to  horses.  Nebuchadnezzar  he  compares 
at  one  time  to  an  eagle,  at  another  to  a  lion ;  to  an  eagle  as  being  the  strongest 
bird  of  prey,  and  to  a  lion  as  being  the  strongest  beast  of  prey ;  similarly  none  of 
the  four  kingdoms  was  more  powerful  or  braver  than  he.  For  a  similar  reason  he 
compared  him  (chap,  ii)  to  gold,  which  is  more  valuable  than  silver.  The  eagle 
again  suggests  the  idea  of  flight  and  elevation ;  both  of  which  apply  to  Nebuchad- 
nezzar (Jer.  iv.  13  and  Is.  v.  27).  The  lion  too  has  extraordinary  strength,  and 
never  turns  his  back  (Prov.  xxx.  30).  In  this  verse  he  is  compared  to  the  two 
together.     The  eagle's  wings  are  his  mighty  armies. 

I  was  gazing  :  i.  e.  at  the  animal  that  I  saw  with  this  terrible  form,  till  I  beheld, 

f  [H.  3.] 


34  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL,  [VII.  5. 

and  lo,  its  wings  were  plucked  off,  so  that  it  could  not  fly ;  typifying  that  his 
joumeyings  and  invasions  were  interrupted. 

It  was  lifted  up  from  the  earth  typifies  what  befell  him  during  the  seven 
years  (iv.  30). 

And  it  was  made  to  stand  on  two  feet  as  a  man,  and  a  man's  heart 
was  given  tmto  it  :  a  description  of  his  condition  when  his  reason  returned  to 
him,  and  he  confessed  the  Unity  of  God,  and  renounced  tyranny  and  transgression, 
and  returned  to  his  kingdom,  and  was  increased  in  dignity  above  what  he  had 
possessed  before  (iv.  ad  Jin.).  He  describes  Nebuchadnezzar  only,  not  noticing  the 
estate  of  his  children,  because  they  had  no  estate  worth  noticing,  i.  e.  they  achieved 
no  acts  of  heroism  or  conquests ;  but  only  retained  the  estate  left  them  by 
Nebuchadnezzar. 

Next,  he  describes  the  second  animal,  as  like  to  a  bear  :  referring  to  its  stupidity  ; 
because  they  were  believers  in  dualism  and  idolaters. 

And  it  was  raised  up  on  one  side :  some  take  this  literally,  as  meaning  that 
as  soon  as  it  rose,  it  was  in  part  overthrown  ;  referring  to  its  dealings  with  Israel, 
i.  e.  those  of  Darius  with  Daniel,  of  Cyrus,  Darius  the  Persian,  and  Artaxerxes  with 
Israel,  and  of  Ahasuerus  after  the  history  of  Haman. 

And  three  ribs  were  in  its  mouth  :  i.  e.  they  governed  three  quarters  of  the 
globe  (cp.  viii.  4). 

And  they  said  thus  imto  it.  Arise,  devour  much  flesh :  the  words  of 
Haman  (Esth.  iii.  9).  He  does  not  say  that  it  ate,  because  this  purpose  was  not 
accomplished  upon  Israel,  but  was  turned  against  their  enemies.  He  describes,  as 
we  observed  before,  the  conduct  of  the  kings  of  Persia,  but  of  none  of  the  Chaldean 
kings  save  Nebuchadnezzar.  Then  he  speaks  of  the  third  animal,  which  he  com- 
pares to  a  leopard;  the  leopard  being  smaller  than  the  bear ;  similarly  in  the  last 
chapter  he  compares  the  kings  of  Persia  to  a  ram,  but  those  of  Greece  to  a  goat, 
which  is  smaller  than  a  ram.  Besides,  the  leopard  haunts  the  doors  of  cities 
(Jer.  V,  6) ;  the  leopard  is  the  kings  of  Greece  collectively. 

Four  wings  of  a  fowl :  these  are  his  (Cerasphorus')  four  disciples  :  see  on 
xi.  4. 

And  dominion  was  given  to  it :   the  well-known  story  of  Alexander. 

7.  (After  this.)  Now  he  speaks  of  the  fourth  animal,  which  he  does  not 
compare,  like  the  rest,  to  a  known  animal ;  because  it  had  not  any  single  religion 
or  doctrine,  nor  did  Daniel  recognise  in  it  any  animal  form  to  which  he  could 
liken  it ;  he  can  only  tell  of  the  horror,  terror,  and  fear  which  it  inspired.  This 
is  a  description  of  the  kingdom  of  Rome ;   cp.  on  ii.  40. 

And  it  had  great  iron  teeth :  i.  e.  TiTUS  the  Sinner,  and  the  others  like 
him,  who  invaded  cities  and  shed  blood  ;  as  a  wild  beast  tears  with  its  teeth  and 
tusks.  The  metaphor  is  followed  up  in  it  devoured  (i.e.  massacred),  and  brake 
in  pieces  (i.e.  oppressed). 

It  was  diverse  :  referring  to  the  variety  of  its  customs,  and  the  great  harm  it  did. 


VII.  12.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  35 

And  it  had  ten  horns :   i.  e.  ten  thrones ;  see  below  on  ver.  24. 

8.  I  considered  the  horns :  owing  to  their  size.  He  was  gazing  intently  on 
their  size. 

He  looked,  and  lo,  after  this,  this  little  horn  had  risen  up  amid  the  ten  horns ; 
and  when  the  little  horn  had  come  between  them,  three  horns  were  thrown  down 
before  it,  and  there  were  left  seven,  with  this  little  horn  among  them.  Then  he 
perceived  that  this  little  horn  had  eyes  like  a  man's  eyes :  and  a  mouth  which 
spoke  proud  words.     He  does  not  tell  us  what  the  words  were ;  see  below  on  ver.  25. 

9,  10.  These  thrones  [which  were  cast  down]  are  the  kings  mentioned  above. 
The  Ancient  of  days  is  an  angel  whose  task  it  shall  be  to  judge  the  nations  on 
the  day  of  Judgment  (cp.  Ps.  1.  3).  A  throne  of  fire,  he  tells  us,  was  set  up  for 
him,  and  the  wheels  of  his  throne  were  flaming  fire ;  the  bodies  of  the  supernal 
angels  are  of  fire,  and  their  thrones  are  of  fire  likewise.  Then  he  shewed  him  a  river 
of  fire  issuing  out  from  before  the  angel,  wherewith  he  punished  transgressors. 

Thousand  thousands  ministered  unto  him  :  because  he  was  the  greatest  of 
the  angels,  like  the  great  Sultan,  before  whom  stand  a  multitude  of  ministers.  Then 
he  tells  us  why  he  sat  upon  the  throne  with  these  ministers  standing  before  him  :  the 
judgraent  was  set  and  the  books  were  opened  :  i.  e.  the  judgment  of  the  world 
for  their  denial  of  Him  (Deut.  xxxii.  yj).  The  books  were  opened :  for  some  of 
their  sins  were  of  long  standing,  and  their  works  were  noted  {ibid.  32).  The 
expression  refers  to  the  ordinary  custom  of  noting  down  a  fact  which  may  be  of 
use  after  some  time,  that  one  may  not  forget  it.  He  is  using  the  language  of  the 
world.  Compare  for  the  same,  in  reference  to  the  deeds  of  the  wicked,  Is.  Ixv.  6 ; 
and  in  reference  to  the  conduct  of  the  godly,  Mai.  iii.  16  and  Ps.  Ixix.  29.  Reference 
is  elsewhere  made  to  God's  judgment  of  the  Gentiles  for  the  wrong  they  have  done 
Israel  (Joel  iii.  2).  He  thought  it  appropriate  to  mention  the  day  of  Judgment  after 
the  termination  of  the  four  kingdoms,  to  shew  that  at  the  close  of  their  sovereignty 
they  must  expect  judgment,  punishment,  and  condemnation,  and  that  their  works 
are  taken  count  of  against  them. 

1 1.  He  returns  to  the  history  of  the  fourth  animal :  the  cause  of  the  destruction 
of  this  great  creature,  he  tells  us,  was  the  proud  language  used  by  the  horn ;  and 
though  God  Almighty  gave  it  a  long  respite,  yet  every  respite  must  end,  and  the 
time  will  at  last  have  come. 

(i)  The  beast  was  slain,  and  (ii)  his  body  destroyed,  and  (iii)  he  was  given 
to  the  burning  of  fire.  "Was  slain  refers  to  the  slaughter  of  their  kings  and  the 
destruction  of  their  armies.  And  his  body  was  destroyed  most  probably  refers 
to  the  abolition  of  their  worship  and  religions ;  so  that  there  will  not  be  left  to 
them  a  Church  or  place  of  Direction  {Qiblah) :  or  it  may  mean  the  extinction  of 
Esau  from  this  world.  And  was  given  refers  to  punishment  in  the  next  world, 
i.  e.  Gehenna,  which  means  'the  place  of  condemnation.' 

12.  After  narrating  the  destruction  of  the  last  animal,  he  records  the  cessation 
of  the  three  kingdoms  previously  mentioned.    This  corresponds  to  ii.  34,  5,  ubi  vide. 

f  2 


^6  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [VII.  13. 

Yet  their  lives  were  prolonged  :  i.  e.  their  religion  and  remnants  of  them- 
selves exist  in  spite  of  the  dominance  of  other  persons  and  other  systems. 

Until  a  season  and.  a  time :  i.  e.  till  the  conclusion  of  the  fourth  kingdom ; 
by  a  time  is  meant  the  dominion  of  Israel.  So  the  remnants  of  the  dominions 
and  their  cults  will  only  pass  away  at  the  appearance  of  the  blessed  Messiah. 

13.  The  Messiah  is  likened  to  a  man  in  contrast  to  the  four  kingdoms,  which 
were  likened  to  beasts.  For  two  reasons.  One  is,  because  he  is  wise  and  knows 
his  Lord.    A  second,  because  he  is  lord  of  all. 

With  the  clouds  of  heaven :  because  God  Almighty  [shall]  send  him,  and 
men  shall  witness  him  as  they  witness  the  clouds.  Then  we  are  told  how  he 
came  to  the  angel  who  sat  judging  the  people,  and  how  the  angel  let  him  come 
before  him  and  close  to  him,  and  then  how  God  gave  the  kingdom  to  him. 

14.  Three  words  are  used  of  him  :  dominion,  glory,  kingdom  :  the  first  means 
the  subjection  of  enemies  and  rebels ;  the  second,  their  coming  to  bow  down  to 
him  at  every  feast  of  Tabernacles,  with  splendid  presents  ;  the  third,  his  sitting 
on  the  royal  throne,  and  receiving  the  tribute,  and  writing  mandates  and  signing 
with  his  name  and  seal.  And  then  he  adds  that  his  sovereignty  will  never  end 
as  that  of  the  other  kingdoms  ended,  nor  his  rule  perish  as  theirs  perished. 

15.  This  describes  his  condition  when  he  woke,  and  felt  as  Nebuchadnezzar 
and  others  had  felt  when  they  did  not  know  how  to  interpret  their  dreams.  A  marvel 
that  Daniel  the  *  interpreter  of  dreams '  should  not  understand  this !  So  he  slept 
again,  and  saw  angels,  and  asked  them  concerning  its  interpretation.  Or  it  may 
be  supposed  that  it  seemed  to  him  in  the  dream  as  if  his  spirit  was  troubled,  and 
as  if  he  was  confused  by  what  he  saw,  and  went  to  the  angel  who  stood  in  front  of 
the  great  angel  that  sat  upon  the  throne,  to  ask  him  of  the  interpretation  of  the  dream. 

In  the  midst  of  the  sheath :  i.  e.  of  the  heart,  which  is  like  the  sheath  to  a 
sword  (cp.  I  Chron.  xxi.  27). 

16.  He  told  me  probably  refers  to  what  he  said  on  the  subject  of  the  four 
kingdoms ;  the  interpretation  of  the  speeches  to  the  end  of  ver.  8  (cp.  ver.  25). 
Or  the  first  may  refer  to  ver.  17,  and  the  second  to  ver.  19. 

17.  18.  A  general  statement,  without  special  explanation  of  the  four  animals; 
corresponding  to  the  method  of  both  Joseph  and  Daniel  in  the  interpretation  of 
dreams  ;  which  is  to  give  a  general  idea,  resolving  the  knotty  and  difficult  point. 
The  four  animals  are  interpreted  as  four  kingdoms,  and  the  sea  as  the  earth  :  the 
four  winds  are  not  explained.  They  must  be  motions  from  God,  whereat  the  four 
empires  arose. 

Shall  receive  the  kingdom  explains  ver.  13.  Daniel  had  no  need  to  ask  about 
the  first  three  animals,  but  only  about  the  fourth. 

19-22.  He  asked  him  concerning  four  things :  (i)  the  signification  of  the  fourth 
animal,  its  strength,  its  teeth,  nails  and  devouring ;  (ii)  the  nature  of  the  ten  horns ; 
(iii)  the  nature  of  the  little  horn  and  its  eyes,  and  how  it  outgrew  the  ten  horns  ; 
(iv)  the  conduct  of  this  horn  in  its  wars,  that  he  saw,  with  the  saints,  and  its  pre- 


VII.  25.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  37 

vailing  against  them.  Of  none  of  these  things  had  he  any  satisfactory  understanding. 
In  Daniel's  question  to  the  angel  there  are  certain  things  additional  to  what  was 
mentioned  in  the  vision — four :  (i)  nails  of  brass ;  (ii)  a  compotinded  horn ; 
(iii)  whose  look  was  more  stout  than  his  fellows  ;  (iv)  made  war  with  the 
saints.  And  there  are  four  verses  about  which  he  did  not  ask  (9,  10,  11,  12),  because 
he  already  understood  their  meaning.  When  he  had  asked  about  these  riddles,  the 
angel  answered. 

23,  24.  Observe  that  he  says  of  the  fourth  diversified ;  all  four  were  already 
said  to  be  diverse  the  one  from  the  other.,  in  their  forms,  as  individually  described ; 
and  this  fourth  is  made  different  from  the  others  in  respect  of  certain  characteristics 
recorded  in  ver.  7. 

Shall  devour  the  whole  earth :  i.  e.  after  devastating  Jerusalem  and  taking 
the  people  captive,  they  increased  their  dominion  above  all  mankind.  And  in  the 
ten  horns  are  ten  kings  :  i.  e.  ten  thrones,  belonging  to  Rome,  on  each  of  which 
a  governor  sat. 

And  another  shall  arise  after  them  :  i.  e.  some  years  after  the  appearance 
of  the  ten  horns.  It  rose  up,  he  tells  us,  between  the  ten  horns ;  i.  e.  in  the  midst 
of  their  dominion  ;  and  took  out  of  their  territory  three  thrones  ;  according  to  some, 
Alexandria,  Jerusalem,  and  Acco. 

And  he  shall  be  diverse  ftom  the  former :  in  his  own  opinion ;  for  he 
ascended  into  heaven  and  seated  himself  on  His  right  hand,  and  did  other  things 
that  we  cannot  repeat,  but  which  are  well  known  to  all,  and  which  we  need  not 
explain;  of  him  it  was  said,  'they  have  set  their  mouth  in  heaven'  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  9); 
and  this  is  the  explanation  of  a  mouth  speaking  great  things.  Then  he  explains 
the  meaning  of  and  made  war  with  the  saints  and  prevailed  against  them, 
sc.  he  shall  wear  out  the  saints  of  the  Most  High  :  referring  to  the  lowering 
of  their  rank,  their  humiliation  and  degradation  in  all  departments  in  matters  spiritual 
and  temporal,  beyond  what  preceded ;  their  having  to  wear  the  yellow  badge,  and 
being  unp.ble  to  speak  when  reviled,  or  to  walk  on  [a  Moslem's]  right,  or  to  present 
themselves  to  buy  goods  however  dear  the  price  they  offer  for  them,  etc.  etc.  Then 
the  angel  added  a  fact  about  which  he  had  not  asked :  and  he  shall  hope  to 
change :  notice  that  he  says  and  he  shall  hope ;  he  does  not  say  that  he  shall 
change  these  for  them,  only  that  he  shall  hope  to  do  so,  which  hope  shall  not  be 
accomplished,  because  God  Almighty  shall  give  him  power  to  humble  and  oppress 
them  in  worldly  matters,  but  shall  not  give  him  power  to  annul  their  religion. 

25.  Times  and  the  law  :  i.  e.  the  holy-days,  sabbaths,  and  feasts ;  he  says  to 
change,  not  'to  abolish,'  because  he  will  not  altogether  abolish  them,  but  only 
hope  to  change  them,  obliging  them  to  do  work  which  is  unlawful  for  them  on  the 
sabbaths  and  feast-days.  The  law  may  be  the  Qiblah,  and  certain  forms  of  religious 
observances  (compare  Esth.  iii.  8,  where  the  king's  *  laws '  refer  to  the  order  to  kneel 
down  and  make  obeisance  before  Haman) :  or  the  days  of  Purim  and  similar 
Israelitic  institutions  ;  it  is  not  fully  explained.    The  prophecy  and  he  shall  wear 


38  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [VII.  26. 

out  the  saints  of  the  Most  High  is  now  in  course  of  fulfilment  upon  Israel ;  of 
the  other,  and  he  shall  hope,  probably  part  was  fulfilled  at  his  (Muhammad's) 
first  appearance,  but  the  greater  part  will  be  fulfilled  in  the  'time  of  tribulation,' 
as,  by  God's  help,  we  shall  explain  in  the  last  chapter. 

And  they  shall  be  given  into  his  hand  until  a  time,  times  and  half  a 
time :  until  may  either  mean  till  he  have  completed  a  time,  times  and  half  a  time, 
that  being  the  length  of  his  reign,  from  beginning  to  end ;  or  it  may  mean  that  the 
tribulation  mentioned  in  ver.  25  b  shall  proceed  from  him  over  Israel  for  that  period. 
Observe  that  he  says  a  time,  i.  e.  one  time  ;  and  times  in  the  plural,  which  need  not 
refer  exclusively  to  two,  but  to  three  or  any  larger  number.  Similarly  in  half  a  time, 
the  word  is  like  the  Hebrew  ""Vn,  which  does  not  signify  *a  half  exactly,  but  s. portion 
of  the  thing  called  \'^V,  etc. ;  as  in  Is.  xliv.  16,  where  ^  half  thereof  (he  bums  in  the 
fire) '  [is  shewn]  by  what  follows  [to  mean  not  exactly  a  half].  So  inf.  xii.  7  :  *  a  season, 
seasons  and  a  half^  which  is  the  same  period  as  this,  not  another.  We  shall  on  that 
passage,  God  willing,  explain  it,  recording  the  opinions  of  the  learned,  and  stating  what 
we  ourselves  esteem  most  probable. 

26.  The  judgment  shall  sit  refers  probably  to  ver.  10  c,  and  tells  us  that  at 
the  end  of  a  time,  times,  etc.,  no  sovereignty  shall  remain  with  any  save  God's 
angel,  who  shall  judge  the  nations  for  their  doings  ;  v.  supra. 

And  they  shall  take  away  his  dominion :  i.  e.  of  the  kingdom  whose  treat- 
ment of  Israel  has  been  mentioned  in  ver.  25. 

They  shall  take  away:  i.e.  either /jra<?/  shall  take  away,  according  to  the  original 
idea  given  in  ii.  34 ;  or  the  Carmathians,  i.  e.  the  'Arms'  (xi.  31),  shall  take  away,  as 
we  shall  explain  in  the  last  chapter. 

TJnto  the  end  :  shewing  that  it  will  not,  like  Israel,  have  a  return. 

27.  Of  the  kingdoms  :  even  if  there  be  other  kingdoms  in  the  world  besides 
Rome  and  Arabia.  All  of  them  shall  obey  the  kingdotn  of  God,  i.  e.  of  His  people, 
and  of  His  Messiah.  Their  kingdom,  too,  shall  not  pass  away:  cp.  Is.  ix.  6; 
Ps.  Ixxii.  17.    The  prophets  dilate  on  this  in  numerous  places. 

The  saints  of  the  Most  High  (plur.)  in  this  chapter :  either  the  saints  are 
Israel,  and  the  Most  High  the  Creator  (cp.  \\'KP'i  NUPN,  iii.  26,  etc.) ;  and  Israel  being 
Holy  to  the  Lord,  they  can  be  called  [by  a  double  plural]  saints  of  the  Most  High:  or 
the  Most  High  may  be  Israel,  since  God  has  made  them  supreme ;  cp.  Deut.  xxvi.  ig. 

28.  Hitherto  is  the  end  :  i.  e.  this  was  the  last  word  spoken  to  me.  After 
this  I  began  to  ponder  on  what  I  had  seen. 

And  I  kept  the  word  in  my  heart :  i.  e.  the  interpretation,  that  he  might  ask 
more  about  it.  He  wrote  down  the  dream  at  once  {sup.  ver.  i),  but  not  the  interpreta- 
tion. This  is  what  happened  to  him  in  the  first  year  of  Belshazzar.  Now  he  tells  us 
what  happened  in  the  third  year. 

VIII. 

I.  The  reason  why  he  wrote  the  Dream  in  Aramaic,  but  the  Vision  in  Hebrew 
has  been  supposed  to  be  that  he  saw  the  dream  when  in  Babylon,  and  the  vision 


VIII.  7.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  59 

in  Shushan  the  Capital.  He  was  not  with  the  king ;  see  chap,  v,  which  shews  that 
Daniel  was  absent  from  Babylon  and  at  Shushan  Habbirah.  He  does  not  tell  us 
the  reason  of  his  absence ;  it  has  been  suggested  that  when  he  saw  the  dream 
he  left  the  city  till  the  seventy  years  of  Babylon  should  have  been  accomplished, 
and  returned  on  Darius'  account.  He  must  have  seen  the  vision  at  the  beginning 
or  in  the  middle  of  the  year. 

After  that  which  appeared  unto  me  at  the  first :  i.e.  after  the  dream.  As 
this,  however,  is  shewn  already  by  §  a,  the  words  indicate  that  after  this  there  were 
no  more  'dreams'  or  'visions'  concerning  the  kingdoms. 

2.  He  saw  things  like  those  he  might  see  when  asleep,  but  was  awake,  and  in 
actual  presence  of  certain  objects  which  he  could  see,  although  they  were  not 
really  to  be  seen.  He  says :  *  I  saw  this  vision  when  I  was  in  Shushan  Habbirah, 
and  I  saw  myself  in  the  vision  standing  on  the  river  Ulai ;'  just  as  Ezekiel  when 
in  Babylon  saw  himself  in  Jerusalem. 

i'3'lK  =  river  J  cp.  baV,  Jer.  xvii.  5.  In  the  last  chapter  he  is  on  the  river 
Tigris. 

3-14.  We  must  give  the  chapter  first  its  literal  interpretation,  to  be  followed  by 
the  interpretation  of  the  angel,  and  then  combine  the  two  together,  as  we  did  with 
the  Dream.  He  saw  then  in  the  Vision,  as  it  were,  a  mighty  ram  standing  on 
the  bank  of  the  river,  on  which  there  rose  first  one  horn,  then  another  afterwards ; 
and  the  second  horn  was  greater  than  the  first.  Then  he  beheld,  as  it  were,  wild 
beasts  that  fell  on  it  from  three  quarters, — the  river  being  to  its  east, — and  lo, 
it  butted  every  animal  that  confronted  it ;  and  met  none,  but  it  did  with  it  what  it 
chose.  Probably  he  saw  the  animals  at  first  powerful  and  ferocious,  and  afterwards 
found  that  they  had  all  perished;  and  that  none  stood  up  before  him,  and  he 
remained  alone,  when  this  he-goat  approached  him  from  the  western  quarter  with 
speed,  not  approaching  the  ground,  moving,  as  it  were,  in  mid-air.  Others  suppose 
that  none  of  the  beasts  approached  the  ground  for  fear  of  this  he-goat.  And  he 
perceived  that  it  had  a  horn  of  a  mighty  aspect  between  its  eyes ;  and  that  it  made 
for  the  ram ;  and  when  it  saw  that  the  ram  neither  feared  it  nor  moved  from  its 
place,  then  the  he-goat  came  upon  it  speedily,  when  it  was  standing  by  itself  on  the 
bank  of  the  river,  and  came  close  unto  it,  to  see  whether  it  would  run  away,  or 
butt  with  its  horns.  And  lo,  the  ram  was  left  quite  alone.  Then  we  are  told  that 
the  he-goat  was  moved  with  choler  against  it,  which  means  that  he  grew  angry 
when  he  saw  how  the  wild  beasts  and  other  animals  had  fled  from  before  him 
and  hidden  themselves,  but  the  ram  remained  in  its  place  and  did  not  flee,  and 
so  he  made  for  the  ram  and  slew  it.  Apparently  the  he-goat  harmed  no  other  of  the 
beasts,  because  they  did  not  stand  before  him ;  but  when  he  saw  the  ra^  stand, 
he  fought  with  him,  and  butted  his  horns  with  his  great  horn  ;  and  there  was  not 
in  the  ram  force  enough  to  meet  him,  so  he  threw  him  on  the  ground  and  trampled 
on  him.  Then  he  perceived  that  the  passers-by  beheld  what  the  he-goat  had  done, 
but  did  not  rescue  it ;    neither  had  it   in  itself  force  to  rescue  itself,  nor  could  it 


40  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [VIII.  8. 

find  any  one  to  rescue  it :  so  he  slew  it.  Then  he  tells  us  what  happened  to  the 
he-goat :  he  magnified  himself  exceedingly  and  rose  up :  and  after  he  had 
magnified  himself,  he  perceived  that  the  great  horn  was  broken  without  any  beast 
or  man  breaking  it :  just  as  he  had  broken  the  horn  of  the  ram.  Then  he  saw 
how,  after  it  was  broken,  there  rose  up  four  horns  in  its  stead :  which  four  were 
not  attached  the  one  to  the  other,  but  in  separate  quarters ;  one  being  on  the  left, 
another  on  the  right,  another  between  the  eye-brows  over  the  top  of  the  nose,  and 
another  at  the  top  of  the  forehead,  to  the  four  winds  of  heaven.  Then  he  saw 
how  there  issued  one  horn  from  the  midst  of  one  of  the  four,  i.  e.  the  one  that 
proceeded  from  his  right  temple :    out  of  one  of  them,  came  forth  a  horn. 

From  a  little  one  :  i.e.  the  one  of  the  four  horns  whence  it  issued  was  the 
least  of  the  four,  and  he  beheld  as  if  this  horn  that  had  issued  was  magnified  and 
increased  above  the  height  of  the  four  horns,  and  he  beheld  it  inclining  in  the 
direction  now  of  the  south,  now  of  the  west,  now  of  the  land  of  Israel.  Then  it 
seemed  to  him  as  though  it  had  risen  to  the  host  of  heaven,  and  thrown  some  of 
them  down.  The  host  of  heaven  very  likely  refers  to  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac ; 
and  some  of  the  stars  to  some  of  the  seven  planets,  Saturn,  etc.  Then  it  seemed 
to  him  as  though  it  trampled  the  stars  on  the  ground  ;  and  then  as  though  the 
horn  went  unto  the  Captain  of  the  host  and  the  mightiest  of  it ;  but  he  does  not 
say  that  the  horn  did  anything  with  the  Captain  of  the  host  more  than  that  it 
magnified  itself. 

And  the  continual  was  taken  away  from  him :  as  though  the  Captain  of 
the  host  had  a  place  in  the  earth  which  he  frequented ;  and  he  was  now  excluded 
therefrom,  and  the  pillar  thereof  cast  on  the  ground  and  destroyed.  And  it  seemed 
to  him  as  though  part  of  the  host  that  had  not  been  trampled  down  by  the  horn 
were  seized,  together  with  the  place  which  he  had  used  to  frequent,  by  the  horn  ; 
and  he  calls  the  horn  sin,  because  he  saw  in  the  vision  how  the  horn  had  with- 
drawn from  the  place  and  exalted  itself.  And  it  seemed  to  him  as  though  it  came 
to  certain  persons  who  spoke  the  truth,  and  threw  them  on  the  ground  and  thrust 
them  through  ;  and  that  it  stood  firm,  and  none  came  to  break  it.  And  when  he 
had  seen  these  things,  he  saw  two  angels  standing  opposite  him,  and  heard  one 
ask  the  other  How  long  ?  This  he  did  not  ask  to  find  out  himself,  but  only  that 
Daniel  might  hear ;  as  we  learn  from  his  saying  afterwards,  And  he  said  unto 
me,  not  'unto  him  ;'  as  though  the  angel  knew  that  he  desired  to  understand  this, 
just  as  he  had  desired  to  understand  the  meaning  of  the  dream ;  only  he  had 
been  able  to  accost  those  angels  (vii.  i6),  but  had  not  courage  to  ask  these  angels. 
So  the  one  asked  the  other  of  that  about  which  Daniel  needed  to  ask.  Now  he 
did  not  ask  concerning  the  whole  Vision,  but  selected  such  future  events  as  Israel 
needed  to  know ;  i.  e.  the  end  of  the  four  kingdoms. 

Then  I  heard  a  holy  one  speaking :  i.  e.  the  one  who  asks  How  long  ? 
To  Palmoni  who  spoke :  Palmoni  is  the  answerer :  the  name  of  the  asker  is 
not  given,  like  the  names  of  many  of  the  angels. 


VIII.  22.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  41 

The  asker  says :  How  long  ?  i.  e.  how  long  shall  this  person  last  who  shall  do 
the  things  mentioned  in  the  verse,  which  are  three  ?  (i)  giving ;  (ii)  the  sanctuary ; 
(iii)  the  host.     The  answer  in  ver.  14  shall  be  explained  below. 

15-18.  He  saw  three  angels,  and  heard  their  talk ;  and  he  heard  the  voice  of 
one  whom  he  did  not  see.  He  mentions  the  names  of  two,  so.  Palmoni  and 
Gabriel,  but  omits  to  mention  those  of  the  other  two.  This  shews  that  Daniel 
did  not  hear  from  the  first  two  more  than  the  question,  owing  to  their  great 
awfulness.  Gabriel,  however,  was  near  in  form  to  a  man,  so  that  he  could  associate 
with  him.  And  he  tells  us  that  Gabriel  did  not  begin  of  his  own  accord,  but  only 
when  he  heard  another  commanding  him  to  tell  Daniel ;  after  which  he  came  to 
Daniel  and  told  him.  This  indicates  that  the  angels  all  knew ;  but  it  is  possible 
that  the  angel  whose  voice  he  heard  was  more  terrible  than  the  two  preceding 
(the  asker  and  the  answerer).  When  Gabriel  approached  him,  he  swooned  from 
fear  of  them,  and  then  fell  fainting  on  his  face. 

Understand,  O  son  of  man :  for  the  Vision  belongeth  to  the  time  of  the 
end :  i.  e.  thou  needest  to  know  this,  because  there  is  told  in  it  what  will  be  at  the 
end  of  the  Captivity. 

18.  And  he  set  me  upright:   i.e.  encouraged  me  and  raised  me  up. 

19.  He  now  proceeds  to  summarize  the  contents  of  the  dream. 

20.  This  is  said  generally,  and  we  must  further  interpret,  as  we  have  done  in 
other  cases.  He  said  in  the  Vision  that  the  one  horn  was  less  than  the  other,  i.  e. 
the  horn  which  came  up  first ;  which  symbolizes  the  fact  that  Media  was  less  in 
military  power  [and  everything  else] ;  their  sole  king  being  Darius  the  Mede,  who 
reigned  one  year ;  whereas  from  Persia  five  kings  arose,  who  reigned  fifty-five 
years.  And  by  the  words  I  saw  the  ram  butting  (ver.  4)  is  meant  that  he  had 
armies  which  marched  to  the  three  quarters.  This  took  place  in  the  time  of  Cyrus, 
as  is  explained  in  Is.  xlv.  i.    With  4b  compare  ibid.  2. 

21.  We  must  again  return  to  the  contents  of  the  dream  which  Gabriel  did  not 
explain.  There  came  from  the  west :  supposed  to  be  Alexander,  who  came  from 
Alexandria.  And  none  touched  the  ground  :  i.  e.  none  confronted  him  from  the 
time  that  he  left  Alexandria  till  he  came  to  Babylon.  He  explains  that  the 
notable  horn  between  his  eyes  is  Alexander,  the  first  king ;  and  he  goes  on  to 
describe  what  the  he-goat  did ;  he  smote  the  ram  and  broke  his  two  horns : 
i.e.  he  fought  the  two  armies,  sc.  the  force  of  Persia  and  Media;  and  he  cast 
him  down  to  the  ground:  referring  to  his  conquering  their  territory,  city  by 
city,  and  slaying  those  of  them  who  withstood  him :  probably  he  killed  Artaxerxes 
the  Persian,  and  when  the  news  got  into  the  provinces,  none  of  them  opposed 
Alexander  any  more.  ^ 

And  there  was  none  that  could  deliver:   i.e.  none  fought  for  them  any  more. 

22.  23.  He  said  'above  (ver.  8),  and  when  he  was  strong,  the  great  horn  was 
broken:  i.e.  when  Alexander  had  accomplished  his  purpose  he  became  tyrannical, 
and  thereafter  was  broken  :  i.  e.  died.    Four  notable  he  interprets  four  kingdoms  : 


42  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.      '  [VIII.  23. 

i.  e.  four  disciples  who  came  after  him,  each  of  whom  took  possession  of  a  quarter  of 
the  globe  without  any  war  breaking  out  among  them  at  the  beginning  of  their  history. 

Shall  stand  up  out  of  the  nation :  shewing  that  these  four  are  all  Greeks. 
"Not  ■with  his  strength  :  neither  individually  nor  collectively  shall  they  have  the 
strength  of  the  first  king.  Supra,  ver.  9,  he  said,  and  out  of  one  of  them :  this 
is  interpreted  here,  and  in  the  latter  time  of  their  kingdom :  the  full  inter- 
pretation is  not  given  till  the  great  last  chapter ;  only  the  one  of  them  is  the 
king  of  the  south,  because  the  king  of  Arabia  sprang  up  between  them,  as  was 
shewn  in  the  Dream  (vii.  8).  To  this  matter  we  shall  come  back,  when  we  shall 
explain  what  the  four  kingdoms  are.  Ibid.,  ver.  9,  from  a  little  :  indicating  that 
the  king  of  the  south,  at  the  time,  was  the  least  of  the  four  disciples  mentioned 
above.  And  it  waxed  exceeding  great  towards  the  south,  etc. :  i.  e.  none  of 
the  four  got  so  far  in  any  direction  of  the  world  as  this  horn  did.  Towards  the 
south  :  i.e.  according  to  some,  Amsdrj  to  others,  Italy j  to  others,  Hijaz.  Towards 
the  east :  i.e.  eastern  countries  and  Khorasan  generally.  And  towards  the 
pleasant  land. 

Here  he  adds,  a  king  of  fierce  countenance,  and  imderstanding  dark 
sentences :  referring  to  his  boasting  against  God,  and  lying  concerning  Him. 
Understanding  dark  sentences :  referring  to  his  stealing  from  the  books  of  the 
Jews,  and  contradicting  their  assertions,  and  professing  to  be  a  prophet  and  to  have 
received  communications  from  Gabriel. 

24  b  interprets  10  b.  Mighty  ones  :  i.  e.  imperial  personages,  Romans,  and 
others  with  whom  he  fought  and  whose  towns  he  took.  The  people  of  the 
saints :  Israel.  He  does  not  say  all  the  mighty  ones  and  all  the  saints,  because 
he  was  not  monarch  of  the  entire  world. 

And  it  cast  down  truth  to  the  groimd,  of  ver.  12,  is  explained  and  he  shall 
corrupt  wonderfully  :  meaning  that  he  railed  against  the  law  of  God  and  the 
words  of  his  Prophets,  and  took  out  of  them  what  he  pleased,  of  which  he  made 
up  a  book  called  Qoran,  and  declared  the  rest  invalid. 

Ver,  1 1  b  is  not  explained  here  being  perspicuous ;  the  fact  will  be  mentioned  in 
the  great  last  chapter. 

Ver.  1 1  a.  The  prince  of  the  host  is  interpreted  here  the  prince  of  princes  : 
this  prince  of  princes  may  be  the  king  of  Rome  :  as  he  took  three  thrones  of  theirs, 
as  was  mentioned  in  chap.  vii.  Others  think  it  refers  to  their  viceroys  in  Babylon, 
in  which  case  this  will  be  the  doing  of  the  Conspirator  who  shall  arise  against 
them  {inf.  xi.  31) :  we  shall  leave  the  explanation  for  the  4th  chapter,  and  elucidate 
it  there. 

It  did  its  pleasure  and  prospered,  of  ver.  12,  is  explained  in  ver.  24.  The 
subject  recurs  in  the  long  chapter,  v.  ad.  xi.  3,  where  we  shall  explain  the  terms 
the  continual  and  the  place  of  his  sanctuary,  sin,  etc. 

We  are  told  here  besides  that  he  shall  be  broken  without  a  hand  :  signifying 
that  his  power  shall  wane  little  by  little,  till  he  perish  and  pass  away. 


VIII.  27.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  43 

25.  Having  explained  the  chapter  briefly,  we  shall  now  return  and  mention  certain 
things  which  will  not  recur.  In  the  first  two  chapters  (i.e.  ii  and  vii)  he  speaks  of 
/our  kingdoms,  and  the  reign  of  the  Messiah  :  in  this  chapter  he  mentions  neither  this, 
nor  that  of  the  Chaldees,  but  only  the  three  monarchies,  which  are  the  three  beasts. 
To  the  description  of  the  kingdom  of  Persia  three  details  are  added :  {a)  it  is  a 
divided  kingdom,  between  Persia  and  Media :  {b)  no  beasts  can  stand  before 
it :  V.  ad  loc.j  (c)  it  will  be  slain  by  the  he-goat,  etc.  These  three  things  are  to 
be  connected  with  three  things  mentioned  in  chap,  vii :  (a)  it  was  raised  up  on 
one  side ;  (d)  three  ribs  were  in  its  mouth ;  (c)  thus  they  said  unto  it, 
Arise,  and  eat  much  flesh.  There  he  describes  how  the  three  quarters  got  into 
its  hands,  and  how  people  said  to  it.  Arise,  etc.  By  combining  the  two  chapters 
we  obtain  a  full  account  of  the  history  of  the  Persian  kingdom.  Now  let  us  mark 
what  is  said  of  the  king  of  Greece.  There  he  mentioned  his  expeditions  (ver.  6 : 
it  had  on  the  back  of  it  four  wings  of  a  fowl)  and  its  having  four  heads, 
corresponding  to  ver.  8  b  here,  there  came  up  four  notable  horns  :  only  here  we 
get  additional  light  in  the  words  (ver.  5)  and.  the  goat  had  a  notable  horn  ; 
since  there  he  did  not  divide  the  kingdom  so  as  to  make  part  of  it  [the  reign  of] 
the  first  king,  and  part  [that  of]  the  four  disciples. 

The  words  when  the  transgressors  are  come  to  the  full  shew,  that  they 
will  transgress,  whether  it  be  in  matters  of  religion  or  in  political  matters :  probably 
in  the  former. 

He  further  adds  to  our  knowledge  of  the  little  horn  by  calling  him  king 
(ver.  23).  Ver.  24  is  an  addition  to  vii.  25.  As  there  was  no  further  explanation 
required  of  what  had  been  said  of  the  day  of  Judgment  and  the  reign  of  the  Messiah 
he  leaves  them  out. 

26.  The  evening  and  the  morning :  i.  e.  what  thou  heardest  Palmoni  say  is  to 
be  taken  literally,  and  is  no  allegory  like  the  Ram  and  the  Goat,  which  are  allegorical, 
and  have  to  be  interpreted,  not  meaning  a  Ram  etc.  in  reality.  No,  these  evenings 
and  mornings  are  real  evenings  and  mornings  :  you  are  not  to  suppose  that  the 
evening  signifies  a  declining  kingdom,  and  the  morning  a  rising  kingdom. 

Two  thousand  three  hundred :  the  sum  made  up  by  evenings  and  mornings 
aggregated  :  making  1 1 50  whole  days ;  notice  that  he  does  not  say  '  2300  evenings 
and  2300  mornings,'  as  elsewhere  *  forty  days  and  forty  nights.' 

But  shut  thou  up  the  vision  :  i.  e.  there  is  no  doubt  about  it.  Some  think 
it  means  seal  this  chapter,  with  its  present  contents.  For  it  shall  be  for  many 
days  :  i.  e.  this  is  a  thing  which  shall  come  to  pass  after  many  long  years. 

27.  Having  heard  in  this  vision  that  'Truth  would  be  cast  to  the  ground,'  etc., 
he  was  vexed  and  distressed.    Days  :  i.  e.  a  year  ;  till  the  death  of  Belshazzar. 

Then  I  rose  up  and  did  the  king's  business :  i.  e.  the  office  given 
him  in  the  time  of  Darius ;  it  was  not  his  own  choice.  The  king  forced  it 
on  him. 

And  I  was  deserted  :   i.  e.  he  kept  aloof  from  society,  cp.  Ezek.  iii.  15. 

g  2 


44  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [IX.  i. 

But  there  was  none  to  make  it  understood :  i.  e.  God  Almighty  did  not 
reveal  to  him  any  of  the  things  in  his  mind  till  the  first  year  of  Darius.  Two  years 
must  have  passed  between  the  Dream  and  the  Vision;  the  former  being  in  the 
first  year  of  Belshazzar,  the  latter  in  the  third  year.  Then  passed  the  third  year 
of  Belshazzar,  So  the  narrative  recorded  in  the  next  chapter  must  have  been  at 
the  end  of  the  year. 

IX. 

1.  Probably  after  he  had  been  cast  into  the  den  of  lions.  Darius' father's  name 
is  mentioned,  because  he  was  a  noteworthy  person ;  though  not  the  Ahasuerus  of 
Mordecai  and  Esther ;  the  latter  being  a  Persian  and  the  present  one  of  the  Medes. 

"WTiich  was  made  king :  to  shew  that  the  same  person  is  meant  as  in  chap. 
V.  ult. 

2.  Owing  to  the  length  of  the  sentence  in  the  first  year  is  repeated. 
Of  his  reign  :    interpretation  of  in  the  first  year  of  Darius. 

I  considered  in  the  books :  i.  e.  the  books  of  Jeremiah.  Jeremiah  mentions  it 
in  a  number  of  places  (e.  g.  xxv.  1 1,  xxix.  lo). 

Tor  the  accomplishing  of  the  desolations  of  Jerusalem :  it  had  only  been 
waste  from  the  nineteenth  year  of  king  Nebuchadnezzar :  and  at  this  period  had  been 
waste  fifty-two  years :  he  can  therefore  only  have  meant  seventy  years  of  the  rule  of 
Babylon  :  the  words  yi'r  the  accomplishing  must  therefore  mean  after  the  seventy  years 
of  Babylon  had  been  completed. 

3.  When  Daniel  perceived  that  the  reign  of  Babylon  was  already  over,  and  that  of 
Darius  had  begun,  and  Jeremiah's  prophecy  (xxix.  10)  was  not  fulfilled,  he  was 
compelled  to  pray  and  ask  God  concerning  that. 

To  seek  prayer :  i.e.  to  seek  with  prayer:  by  way  of  variation  from  with  fasting, 
etc.  He  tells  us  that  he  prayed  fasting  with  sackcloth  on  his  body,  wallowing  in  ashes 
and  prostrating  himself  upon  them. 

4.  Observe  here  prayer  and  confession  in  contrast  with  prayer  and  supplications 
ofver.  3.  The  prayer  contains  four  subjects :  (a)  Glorification  of  God:  ver.  4  b.  ((5)  Enu- 
meration of  sins  and  offences  :  vers.  5-1 1  a.  (c)  Enumeration  of  Israel's  sufferings  in 
consequence  of  their  sins  :  vefs.  li  b-14.  {d)  Petition  that  God  would  return  from  his 
wrath  in  respect  of  the  city  and  the  nation  :  and  that  he  would  forgive  their  sins.  The 
v^ox^  prayer  is  made  to  include  all y&«r  subjects  (ver.  21),  or  three  only,  but  differently, 
in  ver.  2  referring  to  the  three  first,  in  ver.  4  excluding  the  confession  of  sin,  and  including 
the  remaining  three.  He  prefaces  the  prayer  with  a  record  of  the  work  of  God,  as  is 
the  custom  with  those  who  ask  God  for  anything  they  desire :  cp.  Deut.  iii.  24. 

In  this  preface  three  qualities  are  mentioned :  {a)  great :  i.  e.  the  Doer  of  sur- 
prising things,  which  none  save  He  can  do  ;  (b)  dreadful:  meaning  that  He  is  feared 
when  He  takes  vengeance  upon  His  enemies,  so  that  they  tremble  then ;  {c)  which 
keepeth  covenant  and  mercy:  signifying  that  He  had  fulfilled  the  covenant,  i.e.  the 


IX.  8.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  45 

promises  He  had  made  to  the  patriarchs  ;  and  the  mercy,  i.e.  the  promises  given  on 
Mount  Sinai,  and  the  covenant  of  the  plains  of  Moab ;  called  mercy  because  it  was 
an  extension  of  the  former.  The  great  and  terrible  will  then  refer  to  the  miracles 
wrought  by  Him  in  Egypt,  the  Wilderness,  and  in  the  Land  itself,  whereby  He  fulfilled 
all  His  promises  to  the  patriarchs. 

5.  We  have  sinned :  Ps.  cvi.  36,  etc. ;  with  reference  to  the  seven  nations. 

And  have  dealt  perversely  :  with  reference  to  abominations,  unlawful  mar- 
riages, etc. 

And  have  done  wickedly :  with  reference  to  injuries,  such  as  theft,  oppres- 
sion, etc. 

And  have  rebelled :  with  reference  to  the  slaying,  beating,  and  imprisoning  of 
the  prophets. 

And  turned  aside  from  thy  precepts :  i.  e.  rules  concerning  sabbath,  feast- 
days,  etc. 

And  judgments :  referring  to  iniquitous  verdicts. 

6.  We  have  not  received  their  address  to  us  :  *  Return  from  your  evil  ways  ! '  And 
to  all  the  people  of  the  land  (after  oxir  fathers) :  either  our  fathers  are  the  elders 
and  the  persons  of  authority,  and  the  people  of  the  land  the  subjects  ;  or  the  latter 
may  be  the  Gentiles. 

In  ver.  5  he  mentioned  their  neglect  of  God's  commandments  in  each  particular ; 
here  he  observes  that  they  would  not  receive  his  admonitions  or  reprehensions. 

7.  O  Lord,  righteousness  belongeth  unto  Thee :  i.  e.  Thy  cause  against  us  is 
clear,  if  Thou  hast  not  dealt  kindly  with  us  ;  and  ours  is  the  shame,  seeing  that  we 
have  neglected  Thy  worship  and  served  what  has  no  right  to  service  (cf.  Jer.  ii.  26). 
They  were  ashamed  before  the  nations  of  the  world,  when  they  witnessed  the  foulness 
of  their  deeds  (Jer.  vi.  15). 

To  the  men  of  Judah  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  ;  in  this  verse 
the  whole  nation  is  spoken  of  collectively  :  so  he  mentions  first  the  kingdom  of 
Judah  (the  more  honourable),  and  then  the  kingdom  of  Israel :  according  to  the 
custom  of  the  Bible  in  several  books,  which  is  to  name  Judah  before  Israel :  perhaps, 
however,  it  is  put  first  here  because  the  shame  of  Judah  is  greater  than  that  of 
Israel  (Ezek.  xvi.  51). 

That  are  near  and  that  are  far  oflF:  i.  e.  from  the  land  (cp.  Deut.  xiii.  7).  Or, 
those  carried  away  captive  a  short  time  ago,  and  those  carried  away  captive  a  long 
time  ago,  sc.  the  ten  tribes. 

Because  of  their  trespass  which  they  have  trespassed  against  Thee :  '  they 
have  transgressed  Thy  covenants,'  because  they  swore  to  God  and  made  a  covenant 
with  Him,  and  then  broke  it  (Jer.  v.  1 1,  xi.  10).  ^ 

8.  To  us  belongeth  confusion  of  face  is  repeated.  The  first  perhaps  refers  to 
the  multitude,  the  second  to  the  court ;  compare  the  rest  of  the  verse.  Our  fathers 
will  then  refer  to  the  Judges  and  Elders  (Ezek.  viii.  11).  Or  it  may  be  repeated  merely 
in  order  to  contrast  their  doings  with  those  of  God. 


46  '  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [IX.  9. 

9.  Confusion,  he  says,  is  upon  us,  for  two  reasons  :  (i)  owing  to  the  magnitude  of 
our  sins  and  breach  of  the  covenant ;  (2)  because,  in  spite  of  the  heinousness  of 
our  doings,  God  has  spared  us  and  had  mercy  on  us,  and  forgiven  us  (cp.  Ezek. 
xvi.  61,  62). 

Mercies  and  forgivenesses :  mercies  meaning  that  He  spared  them  in  the  time 
of  His  wrath  (2  Kings  xiii.  23);  and  forgivenesses  at  the  time  of  their  contrition  (Neh. 
ix.  17).  These  were  their  relations  with  Him  while  they  were  in  the  Land  ;  and  as  for 
the  whole  time  of  the  Captivity,  His  mercies  still  rested  upon  them  (Ps.  cvi.  46; 
Lam.  iii.  22). 

Though  we  have  rebelled  against  Him:  i.e.  in  spite  of  all  our  offences,  yet  His 
mercy  is  upon  us. 

10.  In  ver.  6  he  said  neither  have  we  hearkened,  which  he  repeats  here  to  finish 
the  sentence;  i.e.  after  saying  O  Lord,  to  us  belongeth  confusion  efface,  and  after 
that  to  the  Lord  our  God  belong  mercies  and  forgivenesses,  he  goes  on  to  say 
although  we  have  rebelled  against  Him  (meaning,  as  stated,  that  they  had  broken 
His  covenant),  and  annexes  to  this  the  further  statement  neither  have  we  hearkened 
to  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our  God  ;  meaning  '  the  prophets  came  to  us  bidding  us 
return  to  Thy  law,  but  we  did  not  receive  their  counsel,  so  that  the  sin  became  double ; 
svac^  first,  we  violated  the  covenant,  and  secondly,  we  disobeyed  Thy  prophets,  this  is 
the  reason  of  the  repetition. 

By  the  hand  of  His  servants  the  prophets  :  including  all  prophets  sent  us  by 
God,  those  whose  prophecies  are  recorded  in  writing,  and  all  others ;  shewing  that  the 
prophets  urged  us  to  walk  in  the  laws  of  God. 

In  His  laws  (plur.),  as  being  a  number  of  special  laws  ;  compare  the  phrase  'This 
is  the  law  for  the  burnt-offering  and  meat-offering '  of  the  sacrifices,  etc. 

11.  All  Israel:  not  all  individual  members  of  the  nation,  since  there  were  among 
them  prophets  and  saints ;  but  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  since  no  one  tribe  was  free 
from  sin,  such  as  idolatry,  etc.  As  for  the  history  of  the  Calf,  we  know  indeed  that 
the  tribe  of  Levi,  without  exception,  refused  to  worship  the  Calf  (Ex.  xxxii.  26,  where 
Who  ?  means  Who  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  does  not  worship  the  Calf,  but  the  Lord 
only  ?  and  then  joined  themselves  unto  him  the  whole  tribe  of  Levi),  whence  they 
earned  their  high  dignity  (ibid.  29).  Otherwise  there  was  not  one  of  the  tribes  that  did 
not  worship  idols,  and  commit  deadly  sins  ;  for  it  was  done  by  their  chiefs  [and  also 
by  the  common  people]  (Ezek.  xxii.  26  ;  Jer.  ii.  8,  26).  Hence  he  says  all  Israel  have 
transgressed  Thy  laws,  meaning  they  have  neglected  their  contents,  and  'thrown 
them  behind  their  backs '  (Neh.  ix.  26 ;  meaning  '  have  transgressed  Thy  word  by 
Thy  prophets ') ;  repeated  to  make  it  clear  that  it  was  because  they  neglected  the  law 
and  did  not  receive  His  word  by  His  prophets  that  the  curse  recorded  in  His  Book 
fell  on  them.  The  curse  is  that  of  Deut.  xxvii.  15  ;  the  oath  the  Chapter  of  the 
Covenant.    All  of  it,  he  says,  has  lighted  on  Israel. 

12.  And  He  hath  confirmed  His  words  :  i.  e.  the  evils  recorded  as  threatened 
by  the  prophets. 


IX.  I?.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  47 

Against  our  judges  that  judged  us:  the  kings  and  judges  who  were  unrighteous, 
and  ruined  the  nation  ;  whence  destruction  alighted  on  all. 

For  xmder  the  whole  heaven  hath  not  been  done,  etc. :  i.  e.  their  eating  the 
flesh  of  parents  and  children,  etc. 

13.  All  that  the  prophets  told,  he  says,  is  written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  the  servant 
of  God  ;  God  hath  covenanted  with  our  forefathers  on  these  terms ;  so  He  did  them 
no  wrong,  but  on  the  contrary  spared  them,  though  their  sins  would  have  deserved 
something  far  heavier  (cp.  Ezra  ix.  13).  In  spite,  however,  of  their  being  visited  by 
the  affliction,  owing  to  the  magnitude  of  their  sins,  they  had  not  returned  to  God  and 
besought  Him  to  turn  from  His  wrath  (Ezek.  xxii.  30). 

And  have  discernment  in  Thy  truth :  i.  e.  consider  the  covenant  that  Thou 
hadst  made  with  us,  so  that  we  might  have  abstained  from  such  transgressions, 
thinking  of  the  covenants  and  agreements  whereby  we  were  bound. 

14.  Therefore  hath  the  Lord  watched  over  the  evil :  i.  e.  since  they  did  not 
repent.  He  did  not  forgive  or  excuse  them. 

For  the  Lord  our  God  is  righteous  in  all  His  works :  i.  e.  He  was  just  in  all 
that  He  brought  upon  them,  though  He  did  not  do  in  any  other  nation  of  the  world 
the  like  of  what  He  had  done  in  Jerusalem. 

And  we  have  not  obeyed  His  voice  :  i.  e.  the  exiles.  In  spite  of  every  disaster 
that  lighted  on  us,  and  our  falling  into  captivity,  nevertheless  they  did  not  receive 
God's  admonition,  or  turn  from  their  transgressions. 

15.  So  far  for  the  enumeration  of  their  sins  and  the  recounting  of  the  disasters  and 
tribulations  that  had  fallen  on  the  nation.  At  the  end  of  this  he  says  :  'And  now, 
O  Lord,  Who  broughtest  Thy  people  out  of  Egypt  by  ten  plagues,  and  hast  manifested 
their  might  and  their  superiority  above  the  nations  of  the  world.  Thou  hast  no  nation 
save  them,  and  we  have  repaid  Thee  by  evil.' 

16.  Lord,  according  to  all  Thy  mercies :  i.  e.  deal  with  us  according  to  Thy 
ancient  custom,  whereby  Thou  usedst  to  turn  from  Thy  wrath  and  have  mercy  upon 
us ;  the  seventy  years  are  accomplished,  and  the  land  has  received  her  due  for  our 
neglect  of  sabbatical  years  and  jubilees. 

Let  Thine  anger  and  Thy  fury  be  turned  away :  referring  to  the  restoration  of 
Israel  thither,  that  the  land  might  be  inhabited. 

Thine  anger :  the  desolation  of  the  Holy  City ;  Thy  wrath  :  the  burning  of  the 
Temple. 

Connect  for  our  sins  with  Jerusalem,  and  for  the  sins  of  our  fathers  with  Thy 
people.  Both  became  a  reproach ;  Jerusalem,  as  being  burnt  and  lying  desolate ; 
Israel,  through  the  disasters  that  had  fallen  on  them,  the  Captivity,  and  their  expulsion 
from  their  City.  The  City  and  the  Nation  are  mentioned,  because  he  desired  of 
Almighty  God  that  the  City  should  be  inhabited,  and  that  Israel  might  return  thither 
out  of  Captivity. 

17.  The  prayer  of  Thy  servant:  referring  to  the  three  portions  enumerated 
above,  adv&r.  4 ;  and  his  supplications,  ver.  16  to  end. 


48  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [IX.  18. 

And  cause  Thy  face  to  shine :  of  which  the  building  of  the  city  and  its  habitation 
will  be  the  result. 

For  the  Lord's  sake  :  for  Thy  Name's  sake,  which  is  upon  it,  since  Thou  hast 
called  it  My  House.  In  the  previous  verse  he  spoke  of  the  City  and  Nation,  here  of 
the  Temple.  He  speaks  of  the  City  and  Nation  together,  but  of  the  Temple  separately, 
because  the  City  was  inhabited  by  Israel,  but  the  Temple  was  more  important  than 
the  City. 

18.  He  returns  to  the  City,  mentioning  the  holy  cities,  which  were  round  about 
Jerusalem.  *  O  Lord,'  he  says,  '  hear  my  petition,  and  see  what  has  overtaken  Thy 
holy  cities,  which  have  become  waste  and  burnt  with  fire.  Repeople  them  with  their 
inhabitants.' 

Not  for  our  own  righteousness  :  indicating  that  others  were  praying  besides 
Daniel.  *  It  is  not  by  our  merits  or  good  deeds  that  we  supplicate  Thee  ;  for  we  have 
transgressed,  and  multiplied  our  sins.  No,  our  confidence  is  in  Thy  great  mercy  ;  do 
Thou  have  mercy  on  us  and  our  cities.' 

19.  This  ends  the  prayer.  Hear :  i.  e.  hear  our  complaint  concerning  our  condi- 
tion and  what  has  befallen  us,  and  forgive  our  sins.  Hearken  :  i.  e.  listen  to  our 
supplication  ;  and  do  sc.  something  for  Thy  people.  Thy  city,  and  Thy  temple. 

Tor  Thine  own  sake:  i.e. because  Thy  Name  is  called  upon  Thy  city  (cp.  Jer. 
XXV.  29) ;  and  Thy  Name,  too,  is  *  God  of  Israel.'  So  do  for  the  sake  of  Thy  Name, 
and  magnify  not  our  sins  and  transgressions. 

20.  Speaking:  ver. 4.  Praying:  referring  to  the  lamentations.  Confessing:  the 
seventeen  phrases  commencing  with  ver.  5  and  ending  with  16  a. 

My  sin  and  the  sin  of  my  people :  hitherto  he  associated  himself  with  the 
nation ;  here  he  mentions  his  sin  separately.  According  to  some,  until  Daniel  grew  up 
he  had  been  trained  in  his  parents'  training,  and  only  when  he  could  think  for  himself 
had  thrown  it  off.  According  to  others,  he  says  my  sin,  because  no  son  of  Adam  is 
free  from  sin,  which  some  commit  intentionally  and  others  unintentionally  (hence 
Eccles.  vii.  20).  Others  still  suppose  he  says  this  because  it  was  impossible  for  him  to 
express  displeasure  at  evil-doers,  owing  to  the  wicked  having  the  upper  hand. 

21.  Speaking  in  prayer  includes  the  whole  prayer  from  ver.  4  to  the  end. 
"Whom  I  had  seen  in  the  vision  at  the  beginning :   viii.  16,  where  another 

angel  sent  him  to  Daniel,  and  Daniel  had  become  familiar  with  him.  Gabriel  is  one  of 
the  special  angels  who  stand  before  the  Glory,  having  six  wings  wherewith  they  fly 
(Is.  vi.  2). 

Wearily  :  i.  e.  quickly. 

Touched  me  about  the  time  of  the  evening  oblation :  at  eventide  ;  some  say 
before  the  regular  prayer,  others  after  it.  Most  probably  the  latter  view  is  right,  viz.  he 
first  offered  up  the  regular  prayer,  and  followed  it  with  the  foregoing  petition. 

The  evening  oblation  :  i.  e.  the  evening  burnt-offering j  the  word  nnJD  means 
simply  *  offering '  (Gen.  iv.  4  ;  Ps.  cxli.  2). 

22.  And  he  instructed  me  and  talked  with  me  :  v.  infra. 


IX.  24.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  49 

I  am  now  come  forth :  from  before  the  Glory ;  and  have  been  sent  to 
instruct  thee  in  what  thou  needest  to  know,  and  thou  shall  instruct  Israel. 

23.  At  the  beginning :  'from  the  moment  when  thou  didst  begin  to  say  "O  Lord  " 
(ver.  16),  the  answer  came,  and  I  have  come  to  instruct  thee  in  what  I  have  been  com- 
manded to  instruct  thee.'  Observe  that  he  does  not  say  '  at  the  beginning  of  thy 
prayer;'  apparently,  while  Daniel  was  recounting  their  sins,  and  what  had  befallen 
Israel,  lo.  He  was  listening :  but  when  he  began  to  say,  *  Lord,  according  to  all  Thy 
righteousness,'  the  answer  came,  and  Gabriel  came  to  him.  This  is  the  treatment  of 
those  who  are  perfect  with  their  Creator  :  '  before  they  cry  He  answers '  (Is.  Ixii.  24). 
To  those  who  are  not  perfect  in  His  eyes  He  delays  the  answer  ten  days  ;  as  was  the 
case  with  Johanan  the  son  of  Kareah  (Jer.  xlii.  8,  where  the  answer  was  not  de- 
layed on  Jeremiah's  account,  but  only  on  account  of  the  people). 

For  thou  art  a  man  of  desires :  '  since  thou  desirest  to  know  the  fate  of  the 
Temple  and  of  the  Nation.' 

Consider  the  matter,  and  understand  the  vision  :  i.  e.  all  the  previous  words 
that  he  had  heard  from  the  angels  in  the  Dream  and  the  Vision.  Some  of  these  he 
explains  in  this  chapter ;  v.  infra.  The  words  may  be  taken  either  as  infinitives  or  as 
imperatives  without  difference  to  the  meaning. 

24.  He  tells  him  what  is  going  to  happen  during  the  four  kingdoms.  Of  these 
seventy  weeks,  seven  passed  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Chaldees  (47  years) ;  57  years  the 
Persians  reigned,  180  the  Greeks,  206  the  Romans  ;  these  are  the  special  periods  of 
the  seventy  weeks.  These  include  the  reigns  of  all  four  beasts  ;  only  the  angel  does  not 
describe  at  length  what  happened  to  any  of  them  save  the  history  of  the  Second 
Temple  during  the  time  of  Rome.  These  seventy  weeks  are  weeks  of  sabbatical  years , 
making  490  years ;  below  they  are  divided  into  periods. 

Are  decreed  upon  thy  people  :  decreed  by  God,  like  the  400  years  decreed  to 
Abraham,  or  the  70  years  decreed  to  Babylon. 

Upon  thy  people  and  upon  thy  holy  place  :  in  so  far  as  there  befell  the  people 
during  thi?  period  different  sorts  of  fortune,  some  commendable  and  others  to  be 
deprecated ;  six  things  are  mentioned  in  this  verse,  three  commendable,  to  finish 
transgression,  to  make  an  end  of  sins,  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity ;  and 
three  are  mentioned  of  a  different  aspect,  to  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness, 
and  to  seal  up  vision  and  prophecy,  and  to  anoint  the  most  holy  :  of  these  six 
some  are  to  take  place  at  the  beginning  of  the  series,  others  at  the  end  of  300  years. 
To  bring  everlasting  righteousness  and  to  anoint  the  most  holy  refers  to  the 
first  beginning  of  the  building  of  the  Temple ;  to  seal  up  vision  and  prophecy  took 
place  during  the  reign  of  the  Greeks;  to  finish  transgression  etc.  was  done  in  the 
middle  of  the  70  years  of  Babylon.  , 

Transgression  refers  to  the  '  worship  of  other  gods'  and  similar  'abominations;' 
sins,  to  the  misplacing  of  the  sabbaths  and  the  other  feasts  ;  iniquity  includes  the 
other  sins  committed  by  the  people  amongst  themselves,  i.  e.  offences  against  life  and 
property  or  possessions.    Others  interpret  differently;  referring  to  make  reconcilia- 

h  [IL3.} 


5o  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [IX.  25. 

tion  for  iniquity  to  offerings :  meaning  that  while  they  were  in  Babylon  to  the  con- 
clusion of  the  Babylonian  empire  God  obtained  from  them  satisfaction  for  the  debt 
they  had  incurred  by  their  sins  :  referring  to  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  21. 

Similarly,  to  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness  is  supposed  by  some  to  refer 
to  the  High  Priests,  and  to  anoint  the  most  holy  to  the  sanctuaries  and  the  priests. 
Others  again  make  everlasting  righteousness  the  offerings,  and  the  most  holy  the 
High  Priest,  referring  to  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  13.  Either  way  it  must  plainly  take  place  at  the 
building  of  the  Temple.  There  remains  to  seal  up  vision  and  propheoy :  this  must 
mean  the  cutting  off  of  vision  and  prophets  from  Israel.  Vision  refers  to  prophecies 
relating  to  future  time,  such  as  those  of  Haggai  or  Zechariah  of  the  future ;  and  the 
prophet  (i.  e.  prophecy)  is  what  is  told  relating  to  the  present.  According  to  some 
authorities  the  Holy  Spirit  was  cut  off  from  the  time  of  Solomon ;  the  Singers  remain- 
ing, who  recited  the  Psalms  (see  2  Chron.  xxix.  20).  Or  again  he  may  mean  by  to  seal 
up  vision  and  propheoy  that  the  Books  of  the  Prophets  were  sealed  and  collected, 
twenty-four  books,  and  fixed  by  Massorahs,  and  other  institutions  necessary  for  this 
purpose.  He  puts  to  seal  vision  and  prophecy  between  to  bring  everlasting 
righteousness  and  to  anoint  the  most  holy  because  prophecy  went  on  between  the 
offering  of  the  oblations  and  the  anointing  of  the  most  holy. 

25.  From  the  going  forth  of  the  commandment :  supposed  to  refer  to  Jer.  xxix. 
10,  or  to  \X.%  going  forth  from  God ;  to  return  ;  i.  e.  the  captives  with  the  sacred  vessels ; 
unto  the  anointed  one,  the  Khalif :  i.e.  the  High  Priest,  who  is  anointed  Wxlh.  the 
*  oil  of  anointing,'  and  is  the  prince  of  the  Lord's  house.  Others  make  the  anointed  the 
High  Priest,  and  the  prince  Zerubbabel  son  of  Shealtiel.  He  tells  him  then  that  from 
the  time  of  the  destruction  of  the  Holy  Place  and  the  captivity  of  the  nation  to  the 
building  of  the  Second  Temple,  is  seven  weeks,  i.e.  forty-nine  years.  Now  the  people 
did  not  cease  dwelling  in  the  city  till  the  twenty-third  year  of  Nebuchadnezzar ;  they  are 
called  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  24)  '  inhabitants  of  waste  places,'  and  were  taken  captive  by  Nebu- 
zaradan  (Jer.  lii.  30).  Now  if  twenty-three  years  be  taken  away  from  the  sum  total  of  the 
seventy  years  of  Babylon,  there  remain  forty-seven  years  plus  one  year  for  Darius  and  one 
year  for  Cyrus.    This  makes  a  total  of  forty-nine  years;  to  which  the  seven  weeks  refer. 

And  threescore  and  two  weeks  it  shall  be  built  again  :  this  is  the  duration 
of  the  Second  Temple  till  the  coming  of  TiTUS  the  Sinner,  king  of  Rome;  434  years. 
During  this  period,  he  tells  him,  Jerusalem  will  again  be  inhabited. 

Market-place  :  i.  e.  the  fora  of  the  judges. 

Decision  :  i.  e.  the  performance  of  legal  sentences  of  death,  etc. 

The  dough  of  the  times  ^:  referring,  it  is  said,  to  the  offering  of  the  High  Priest 
(Lev.  vi.  13).  Of  the  times :  inasmuch  as  half  was  offered  in  the  morning,  and 
half  in  the  evening. 

The  offering  of  the  High  Priest  is  mentioned  separately,  because  so  long  as  it  was 
offered  the  altar  continued  in  service. 

26.  And  after  the  threescore  and  two  weeks :  at  the  close  of  these  sixty-two 

*  Mistranslation  for  '  even  in  troublous  times.' 


X.  I.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  51 

weeks  this  Anointed,  spoken  of  in  ver.  25,  shall  be  cut  off;  referring  to  the  cessation  of 
priests  from  the  altar. 

And  shall  have  none  :  1.  e.  no  son  or  successor  in  his  place ;  <?r,  the  whole  time 
of  the  Captivity  they  shall  have  no  royalty. 

The  city  and  the  sanctuary  :  Jerusalem  and  the  Temple  of  the  Lord. 

Shall  destroy  :  shall  devastate  and  burn  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  7). 

The  people  of  the  prince  that  shall  come  :  the  army  of  Rome  with  Titus. 

And  his  end  shall  be  with  a  jaood :  i.  e.  such  as  are  left  of  Israel  after  the 
massacre  shall  be  swept  away,  i.  e.  carried  away  captive.  This  is  the  description  of 
what  befell  the  sanctuary,  Jerusalem,  and  the  nation. 

Until  the  end  of  war:  i.e.  till  the  end  of  wars,  sc.  the  wars  of  Gog,  Jerusalem 
and  the  cities  of  Judah  shall  lie  waste  ;  as  has  been  witnessed  up  to  our  day. 

27.  One  week  is  left  out  of  the  seventy  ;  he  describes  their  condition  therein.  The 
enemy,  he  says,  made  a  covenant  with  them  for  seven  years,  that  he  would  not 
carry  them  away  captive  or  harm  them  ;  when  half  the  week  had  passed  he  betrayed 
them,  and  broke  the  covenant.  Some  suppose  that  what  induced  him  to  do  this  was 
that  he  saw  that  the  people  withdrew  from  the  city  in  detachments,  seeing  that  they 
must  certainly  otherwise  be  taken  captive  or  fall  before  the  enemy ;  and  they  said, 
*  Let  us  withdraw  of  our  own  accord  :  it  is  better.'  Some  say  that  the  Israelites  slew 
certain  Gentiles  that  were  in  the  city,  who  were  Roman  nobles  ;  when  they  had  done 
this  the  Romans  broke  faith  with  them,  took  the  city,  burnt  the  Temple,  and  put  a  stop 
to  the  offerings  (he  shall  cause  the  sacrifice  and  the  oblation  to  cease).  The 
histories  further  tell  us  that  he  set  up  in  God's  house  an  idol,  and  offered  up  swine  on 
God's  altar. 

The  wing  of  abominations :  the  army  of  the  Romans,  who  are  called  'abomina- 
tions ; '  they  are  the  devastators  of  the  sanctuary  (one  that  maketh  desolate). 

Even  unto  the  consummation  and  the  determination  :  i.  e.  till  God  work  a 
consummation  and  a  determination  by  causing  the  nations  to  cease,  and  especially 
Edom.    The  first  referring  to  the  city  [of  Rome]  ;  the  second  to  the  kingdom. 

Shall  be  poured  out  upon  the  wasted  :  i.  e.  the  wrath  of  God  upon  this  city, 
which  shall  be  waste  till  Israel  come  and  inhabit  it.  God  shewed  this  to  Daniel 
because  he  desired  to  know  what  would  become  of  the  people  and  the  Holy  Place  in 
the  time  of  the  three  kingdoms ;  for  he  knew  that  the  Holy  Place  must  one  day  be 
inhabited,  and  the  captives  must  return  ;  but  they  might  have  continued  in  the  condi- 
tion in  which  they  were  during  the  time  of  the  Persian  and  of  the  Greek  empires. 
God  shewed  him  that  the  city  must  again  be  wasted,  and  the  people  taken  captive, 
that  he  might  know  it,  and  Israel  might  know  it.  Thereat  his  heart  was  pained,  and 
he  sickened.  ^ 

X. 

I.  In  the  third  year  of  Cyrus,  he  tells  us,  an  angel  appeared  to  him,  who  told  him 
all  that  God  would  reveal  to  him.    This  is  the  fourth  section.    The  same  thing 

h  2 


52  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [X.  2. 

happened  twice  in  the  reign  of  Belshazzar,  and  once  in  the  reign  of  Darius.  This  is 
the  fourth  time.  Apparently  till  the  first  year  of  the  reign  of  Cyrus  he  was  engaged 
in  the  Sultan's  business  ;  see  on  chap.  i.  ult. ;  and  then  withdrew  from  it,  having  got 
leave,  especially  after  the  proclamation  (Ezra  i.  3).  Then  again  he  had  become  old, 
and  his  heart  was  affected  by  what  he  had  been  told  of  the  future  capture  of  the  city 
and  the  return  of  the  nation  into  captivity,  as  was  explained  before.  Then  he  began 
to  lament  and  fast,  in  order  to  ask  God  of  that  which  was  in  his  mind ;  he  sought  help 
for  his  petition  in  lamentation  as  before,  chap,  ix, 

A  thing  was  revealed :  i.e.  a  matter  which  was  difficult,  and  of  which  the  inter- 
pretation was  concealed  from  him,  became  clear  after  being  obscure. 

And  the  thing  was  true :  i.  e.  literally  true,  not  like  the  Dream  or  the  Vision, 
see  on  ix.  26.  Notice  that  this  word  true  occurs  four  times,  with  the  same  meaning ; 
ix.  26  is  the  first,  the  present  passage  the  second  ;  x.  21  and  xi.  2. 

Whose  name  was  called  Belteshazzar  :  not  *  whose  name  was  B.'  Some  think 
the  name  still  remained  upon  him,  and  that  he  did  not  discard  it.  Others  infer  that 
he  was  called  by  that  name  till  the  fall  of  the  Chaldean  empire,  and  that  the  appellation 
ceased  with  that ;  which  is  probable. 

And  a  great  host :  i.  e.  the  prophecy  of  a  great  host,  whether  Edom  or  Ishmael 
(see  on  xi.  3). 

And  he  understood  the  thing,  etc. :  i.  e.  the  explanation  of  the  communication 
made  to  him  in  the  last  chapter  ;  and  that  of  the  Vision  which  he  had  seen,  i.  e.  chap. 
viii.     See  on  the  following  verses. 

2,  3.  In  those  days :  in  the  third  year  of  Cyrus  ;  the  sarne  days  in  which 
he  lamented.  The  phrase  three  weeks  of  days  indicates  the  difference  between 
these  weeks  and  the  seventy  weeks  ;  which  were  oi years. 

I  was  mourning  :  he  mentions  certain  things  which  he  practised  during  those 
weeks ;  [in  reference  to]  i.  food  ;  ii.  drink  ;  iii.  scent.  Of  food  he  mentions  bread  and 
meat ;  of  drink  wine ;  and  the  bread  he  specifies  as  pleasant,  since  doubtless  he  must 
have  eaten  some  bread  ;  he  explains  that  he  did  not  eat  fine  wheaten  bread,  especially. 
But  of  meat  and  wine  he  says  it  came  not  into  my  mouth,  since  he  neither  ate  the  one 
nor  drank  the  other  at  all.  Probably  he  ate  bread  made  of  barley  or  coarse  wheat 
with  a  relish  of  vegetables  and  grain  ;  and  perhaps  fruit.  Next  he  speaks  of  oil  and 
scent.,  neither  did  I  anoint  myself  at  all.  We  know,  too,  that  he  must  certainly 
have  changed  his  costume  and  put  on  rough  clothing  and  have  shunned  all  amuse- 
ment. All  this  is  after  the  ordinary  fashion  of  mourners.  It  remains  to  speak  of  the 
fasting.  Some  say  that  he  fasted  [in  order  to  gain  knowledge],  as  the  angel  says, 
itifra  ver.  10:  supposing  that  fasting  is  one  form  of  mourning,  which  is  not  improbable; 
so  that  he  bound  himself  to  continue  mourning  till  God  should  reveal  to  him  what  He 
would  of  the  affairs  of  the  nation  ;  similarly  to  the  mourning  which  David  enforced  on 
himself  till  God  revealed  to  him  His  will ;  Ps.  cxxxii.  3.  The  saints  of  God  could  do 
this,  knowing  that  God  would  answer  their  request  favourably ;  the  people  of 
the  Captivity  cannot  venture  so  far,  but  can  only  stand  up  and  ask  God  concerning 


X.6.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  53 

such  things  as  persons  like  them  can  ask.  We  must  explain  the  nature  of  the  meat 
which  Daniel  abstained  from  eating.  Let  us  state  that  it  refers  to  meat  which  was 
lawful  to  eat,  since  he  only  abstained  during  these  days  from  the  four  things  to  which 
in  previous  times  he  had  been  accustomed,  and  to  which  he  returned  after  the  revela- 
tion of  what  God  pleased  to  reveal  to  him.  As  to  food  which  had  always  been 
unlawful  for  him  to  eat,  that  cannot  be  included  in  the  terms  of  the  verse  ;  nor  can 
the  word  meat  refer  to  the  flesh  of  forbidden  beasts,  birds,  and  fishes.  Nor  again  to 
the  flesh  of  oxen  and  sheep,  which  is  only  made  lawful  after  the  performance  of  the 
conditions  contained  in  the  laws,  as  we  have  explained  in  the  Commentary  on  the  Pen- 
tateuch and  the  Book  of  Commandments  which  we  have  compiled.  If  any  one  ignorant 
of  Hebrew  ask,  'What  flesh  is  that  ?'  we  answer,  the  meat  of  fowls,  land  animals,  and 
fishes.  If  he  ask  again,  *  How  can  you  shew  that  "Wl  in  Hebrew  means  "  fish  "  ?'  We 
answer,  '^^1  is  a  name  for  both  fowl  and  fish,  nor  is  there  any  distinction  between  fish 
and  other  animals.  However,  we  can  prove  it  by  a  text :  Num.  xi.  21,  *  Thou  hast  said, 
I  will  give  them  flesh;'  22,  'Shall  flocks  and  herds  be  slain  for  them  ?  or  shall  all  the 
fish  of  the  sea  be  gathered  together  for  them  ?'  This  shews  that  'fish'  are  'flesh' 
("Id),  no  less  than  oxen  and  sheep.  Then  fowl  are  called  so  in  the  same  chapter ; 
ver.  33,  'While  the  flesh  (i.  e.  the  quails)  was  yet  between  their  teeth.'  Similarly  fowls 
are  coupled  with  beasts  in  Lev.  xvii.  13,  14  ;  and  the  same  is  indicated  in  the  history 
of  Noah.  It  is  clear  then  that  11J*3  is  a  name  for  every  animal  beyond  question. 
Then  those  who  allow  meat  during  the  Captivity  cannot  adduce  this  verse  as  evidence, 
especially  as  the  altar  of  God  was  being  employed,  and  sacrifices  continually  offered 
on  it ;  for  it  had  now  been  built  a  whole  year. 

4.  This  verse  indicates  that  it  was  after  the  conclusion  of  the  three  weeks.  So  we 
learn  that  he  began  to  lament  on  the  third  of  the  month.  He  tells  us  that  he  was 
walking  on  the  bank  of  the  Tigris,  when  this  angel  appeared  to  him.  Observe  that  in 
the  Vision  he  was  not  in  reality  on  the  bank  of  the  river  Ulai ;  he  only  saw  this  in  a 
Vision,  whereas  this  was  seen  by  him  waking,  when  he  was  standing  in  reality  on  the 
river's  bank.  He  does  not  say  at  what  point  on  the  bank  he  was — Mosul,  Babylon, 
or  elsewhere.     The  source  of  the  Tigris  is  above  Mosul,  and  it  flows  into  the  Marshes. 

5.  Uphaz  is  the  name  of  a  place  (Jer.  x.  9). 

6.  This  angel  is  not  Gabriel,  as  some  have  thought,  since  he  was  already  familiar 
with  Gabriel ;  nor  was  his  form  so  mighty  and  terrible  ;  on  the  contrary,  when  he  saw 
him  at  the  end  of  his  prayer  he  was  not  affected  in  this  way  at  all,  as  we  shall  explain. 
Nor  does  he  describe  any  of  the  angels  whom  he  mentions  as  he  describes  this  angel, 
owing  to  his  fear  and  terror  of  him.  We  shall  state  what  is  necessary  on  this  subject 
on  ver.  13. 

Then  he  describes  the  colour  of  his  body :  from  his  neck  to  his  knees  it  resembled 
the  colour  of  the  blue  stone ;  and  his  face,  he  says,  was  like  the  flashing  lightning ;  and 
its  colour  red  like  the  lightning.  And  his  eyes,  he  said,  were  like  torches  of  fire  which 
sparkle  to  a  distance.  And  his  arms  and  legs,  he  tells  us,  were  like  the  colour  of 
burnished  brass,  i.  e.  yellow.    And  his  voice  was  heard  at  a  distance  like  the  noise  of 


54  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [X.  7. 

an  army.  All  these  things  would  frighten  the  spectator.  And  his  garments  were 
those  of  authority,  girt  up  after  the  fashion  of  the  warrior  whose  garments  are  tied  in 
the  middle.     He  had  come  to  him  from  battle  :  v.  infra. 

7.  Observe  that  he  did  not  see  the  angel  on  the  bank,  but  only  in  the  air,  above  the 
river,  raised  above  its  surface,  cp.  xii.  6  ;  and  he  tells  us  that  he  saw  him  in  this 
terrible,  frightening  form. 

For  the  men  that  were  with  us :  indicating  that  there  were  people  with  him, 
and  that  he  saw,  but  no  one  else.  Now  the  words  I  alone  saw  the  Vision  already 
tell  us  that  he  alone  saw  it :  what  then  is  the  purpose  of  the  clause  Tor  the  men  that 
were  with  me  .  .  .  ?  Answer  :  to  indicate  that  these  people,  although  they  did  not 
see,  yQi  felt  something,  and  that  there  fell  on  them  a  quaking ;  which  possibly  fell  on 
them  from  the  sound  of  his  voice,  so  that  they  heard  the  sound,  but  did  not  see  th^ 
figure.  They  saw  not  the  Vision  ;  not,  *  they  did  not  hear.'  On  the  contrary,  when 
they  did  hear  his  voice,  there  fell  on  them  a  trembling,  and  they  fled  scared.  Probably 
these  were  people  who  had  gone  out  with  him  for  some  purpose  not  mentioned  by 
the  Scripture.  Similarly  when  our  forefathers  heard  the  voice  of  God  there  fell 
on  them  fear  and  trembling,  and  they  fled  afar  off  (Ex.  xx.  18). 

8.  In  the  previous  verse  he  said,  '  And  I  Daniel  alone  saw  the  Vision ;'  in 
the  present,  So  I  was  left  alone;  and  there  was  none  with  me  to  keep  me 
company. 

There  remained  no  strength  in  me :  to  stand. 
And  I  retained  no  strength :  to  move. 

My  comeliness  was  turned  in  me  into  corruption  :  i.  e  his  face  became 
yellow,  as  happens  to  people  at  the  time  of  death. 

9.  I  was  in  a  deep  sleep  :  he  had  swooned  for  a  little. 

10.  A  hand :  i.e.  the  angel's  hand,  whose  hand  he  saw,  but  not  the  angel 
moving  it,  so  that  he  rose  up  from  being  on  his  face,  and  was  on  all  fours  ;  not  having 
strength  to  sit  down  or  to  stand. 

11.  He  commanded  him  to  do  two  things  :  first,  to  attend  to  what  he  should  say 
to  him,  telling  him  that  God  had  sent  him ;  secondly,  to  stand  on  his  feet,  that 
he  might  hear  his  voice.  And  he  tells  us  that  he  did  stand,  yet  not  firmly,  but 
was  trembling. 

12.  Fear  not:  fear  not  that  thy  station  in  God's  eyes  may  have  been  lowered, 
seeing  that  formerly  in  thy  prayer  the  answer  came  to  thee  whilst  thou  wast  praying, 
and  this  time  three  weeks  are  passed  and  no  answer  to  thee.  No.  On  the  first  day 
that  thou  didst  commence  to  lament,  thy  words  were  heard,  only  I  had  an  occupation 
that  prevented  me  from  coming  to  thee. 

Thy  words  were  heard  indicates  that  he  was  also  asking  God  to  instruct  him  in 
that  wherein  he  desired  to  be  instructed  ;  and  he  adds  that  he  is  now  come  to  tell 
him  what  God  thought  meet  to  tell  him. 

13-15.  What  prevented  him  from  coming  on  the  first  day,  he  says,  was  his  fighting 
with  the  Prince  of  Persia.    The  idea  is  that  he  fought  with  him  till  Cyrus  died  :  when 


X.  21.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  c^^ 

Cyrus  died  he  left  him  and  came  to  Daniel.  We  shall  supplement  this  so  far 
as  is  necessary  at  xi.  i.  As  soon,  he  adds,  as  I  had  finished  fighting  with  the  Prince 
of  Persia  I  came  to  tell  thee  what  shall  happen  to  thy  people  at  the  latter  time ; 
i.  e.  the  time  of  the  end  of  the  four  kingdoms. 

For  the  Vision  is  yet  for  many  days  :  i.  e.  the  vision  which  thou  sawest 
before  relates  to  the  latter  time,  i.  e.  to  the  end  of  the  four  kingdoms. 

When  the  angel  had  proceeded  thus  far,  his  terror  overpowered  him,  and  he  had 
no  strength  to  stand,  but  fell  on  his  face. 

And  I  was  dumb  :  there  was  no  strength  left  in  him  to  speak  to  him  concerning 
his  utterance ;  he  became  dumb  and  could  not  talk  at  all. 

1 6,  17.  He  saw  an  angel,  resembling  a  man,  talking  with  him ;  perhaps  the 
angel's  hand  approached  his  mouth  ;  cp.  Is.  vi.  6  ;  Jer.  i.  9.  When  the  angel  had 
approached  him,  his  mouth  was  opened  and  he  spoke. 

Unto  him  that  stood  before  me  :  the  great  angel  who  had  addressed  him. 
He  said  this  by  way  of  excuse :  *  had  it  not  been  for  the  fright  that  came  over  me,  and 
my  strength  failing,  I  had  stood  up  as  thou  badest  me.' 

My  sorrows  are  turned  upon  me  :    cp.  i  Sam.  iii.  19. 

For  how  can,  etc.  ?  i.  e.  I  have  no  power  to  stand  up  to  speak  with  such  as  my 
lord.     My  rank  is  not  so  high. 

Straightway :  since  I  met  with  thee,  no  strength  nor  motion  has  been  left  in  me. 
Perhaps  breath  here  means  reason  j  so  Job  xxvi.  4  ;  xxxii.  8. 

18.  When  the  hand  touched  him  he  spoke ;  but  there  was  no  strength  in  him  to 
stand  :  so  the  angel  repeated  what  he  had  done,  and  approached  him  ;  and  there- 
upon he  found  strength  to  stand.  The  great  angel  was  above  the  waters  of  the  river  : 
Daniel  at  first  saw  his  hand,  but  nothing  more.  Afterwards  he  saw  himself;  and  the 
angel  talked  with  him  familiarly,  and  now  touched  his  lips,  and  now  approached  him; 
possibly  took  his  hand  and  drew  him  up  :  strengthened  him. 

19.  Fear  not :  spoken  by  the  great  angel ;  meaning  'fear  not  for  thyself ;  rise  up 
at  once,  anc"  be  comforted,  and  strengthen  thy  heart  ;  and  hear  what  I  shall  tell  thee.' 
And  when  he  had  heard  his  voice,  his  heart  was  strengthened,  he  having  doubtless 
beforehand  stood  upon  his  feet. 

20.  Knowest  thou?  referring  to  his  previous  words  (ver.  12).  'I  have  told  thee 
already,'  he  says,  '  why  I  am  come  ;  and  I  must  immediately  return  to  fight  with  the 
Prince  of  Persia  concerning  the  four  kings  which  are  left  to  Persia.'  This  is  explained 
in  what  follows. 

And  when  I  go  forth :  i.  e.  I  shall  go  forth  from  fighting  with  the  Prince 
of  Persia,  and  afterwards  the  Prince  of  Greece  shall  come.  He  does  not  tell  what 
shall  come  after  Greece.  . 

21.  That  which  is  inscribed  in  the  writing  of  truth:  i.e.  that  which  he 
had  heard  in  the  Dream  which  he  wrote  down  (vii.  i).  '  This,'  he  says,  '  which 
is  inscribed  in  the  writing  of  truth  has  an  inner  meaning,  which  I  will  evolve  for  thee 
without  further  allegory.' 


56  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [XI.. i 

There  is  none  that  strengtheneth  himself  with  me  :  there  is  none  that 
helpeth  me  to  destroy  these  kingdoms  save  Michael  only. 

YoTir  prince :  indicating  that  Michael  is  Prince  of  Israel,  and  that  the  angel 
conversing  with  him  was  demolishing  the  kingdoms  with  Michael. 

Against  these  :  either,  the  kings  of  Persia,  who  have  just  been  mentioned  ;  or, 
the  four  kingdoms.  These  two  angels  were  helping  each  other  to  put  an  end  to 
all  these  kingdoms.  The  great  angel  does  not  state  that  he  is  prince  of  any  one 
of  the  dominions.  Perhaps  Michael  fought  with  the  enemies  of  Israel  only ;  and 
this  one  with  the  ruler  of  every  nation,  whom  he  depiosed,  when  the  period  of  its  sway 
was  over. 

XI. 

I.  Just  as  he  had  helped  Michael  to  slay  Cyrus,  so  he  had  helped  him  to  slay 
Darius,  or  had  killed  him. 

Here  we  must  pause  a  moment  and  briefly  state  some  necessary  ideas  on  the 
subject  of  angels.  We  are  not  justified  in  setting  aside  the  literal  meaning  of  the 
Word  of  God  or  of  His  prophets,  save  where  that  literal  meaning  is  hindered  or 
precluded  as  being  contradicted  by  the  reason  or  by  a  clear  text.  In  such  a  case  it  is 
understood  that  the  first  text  requires  an  explanation  reconciling  it  with  the  reason  or 
with  the  other  text ;  the  words  having  been  used  in  some  metaphorical  or  improper 
sense,  as  we  have  observed  in  a  number  of  places  in  the  Law  and  the  Blessed 
Prophets.  Ideas  repudiated  by  the  reason,  are  such  as  *  God  descended,'  *  God 
ascended,'  etc.  ;  precluded  by  the  reason,  because,  if  we  take  the  verse  literally, 
it  follows  from  it  that  God  must  be  a  material  substance,  capable  of  inhabiting  places 
and  being  in  one  place  more  than  in  another,  moving  and  resting,  all  qualities  of  created 
and  finite  beings,  and  He  must  possess  these  attributes.  Such  texts  must  therefore  be 
capable  of  being  explained  away,  and  the  term  indirectly  interpreted  may  be  either 
the  noun  or  the  verb.  The  first  is  done  in  cases  like  *  and  God  descended,'  '  and  God 
ascended,'  where  we  affirm  the  action  of  the  person  of  whom  '  ascending '  and 
*  descending '  are  attributes  ;  only  the  person  intended  is  the  Angel  of  God,  or  the 
Glory  ofGo^  or  the  Apostle  of  God,  with  the  ellipse  of  a  word.  The  second  is  done 
in  cases  like  *  God  was  glad,'  or  '  God  was  sorry,'  or  '  God  was  jealous  ; '  all  of  which 
are  accidents  not  to  be  predicated  of  the  Immortal  Creator.  This  phrase  must 
contain  a  sense  to  be  evolved  in  whatever  way  the  words  will  allow.  The  lan- 
guage has  employed  in  such  cases  metaphors  and  inaccurate  expressions, 
because  the  application  of  the  reason  can  point  them  out.  Where  one  text  is 
precluded  by  another,  the  one  which  admits  of  two  or  more  interpretations  must 
be  explained  away.  Now  no  clear  text  of  Scripture  denies  the  possibility  of 
God's  having  created  angels  ;  nor  does  the  reason  reject  it.  Nor  can  their  exist- 
ence be  rejected,  whether  we  hold  that  they  are  accidents,  or  whether  we  hold  that 
they  are  created  and  destroyed.  For  we  find  in  the  Scriptures  many  places  in  which 
angels  are  mentioned,  and  in  two  different  ways.    Sometimes  they  appear  sensibly 


XI.  I.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  57 

and  are  witnessed  by  persons  waking,  like  any  other  visible  object  ;  sometimes  in 
dreams,  and  there  too  like  other  objects :  instances  of  the  first  case  occurred  to 
Jacob,  Moses,  Balaam,  Joshua,  Gideon,  Manoah,  David,  Nebuchadnezzar,  Daniel ; 
of  the  second  to  Abimelech  (as  some  think),  Jacob,  and  Balaam.  Their  voices  too 
have  been  heard  without  their  being  seen,  as  by  Hagar,  Abraham,  Samuel,  David. 
These  all  occur  in  our  Chronicles,  and  there  is  no  ground  for  rejecting  these  texts.  It 
is  known  that  nothing  but  body  can  be  perceived  by  the  sense  of  the  eye  :  and  that  an 
accident  cannot  exist  by  itself.  An  angel  therefore  must  be  a  body.  Now  a  body 
cannot  bring  itself  into  existence,  but  must  have  a  Creator  to  create  it ;  and  it  is  a  thing 
which  admits  of  persistence.  An  angel  therefore  being  created  must  be  capable  of 
persistence  ;  and  what  is  there  to  necessitate  his  annihilation  ?  If  any  one  hold  that 
an  angel  is  only  created  for  the  moment,  for  the  sake  of  a  message  or  something 
similar,  and  that,  when  that  is  finished,  there  is  no  reason  why  he  should  endure, — 
what,  we  ask,  indicates  that  he  is  created  at  the  moment, — or  created  merely  for  the 
message  or  purpose  which  renders  him  for  the  moment  necessary  ?  If  you  say:  'Then 
what  has  the  angel  to  do  besides  delivering  messages  and  similar  tasks  ? '  We 
answer :  To  praise  and  glorify  his  Creator.  Is  not  the  prophet  too  chosen  to  deHver  a 
message  ?  but  nevertheless  he  is  not  created  merely  to  speak.  We  find,  too,  in  our 
accounts  that  angels  do  endure.  Thus  the  Glory  abode  with  the  children  of  Israel 
nine  hundred  years;  and  Daniel  says  of  Gabriel,  and  the  man  Gabriel,  whom  I  had 
seen  in  the  Vision  at  the  beginning,  and  there  had  elapsed  between  the  two  occasions 
a  year.  Nor  can  we  suppose  the  second  Gabriel  was  merely  like  the  first,  who  had 
been  created  a  year  before  and  then  destroyed ;  for  that  would  not  entitle  the 
second  to  be  [called]  the  same  as  the  first.  Again,  there  are  the  words  of  this  angel 
who  is  speaking  to  Daniel,  who  says :  '  I  have  been  some  time  in  war,  and  am  going 
to  fight  those  who  remain  :'  see  also  xii.  I.  These  verses  point  to  their  persistence  : 
and  after  this  discussion  there  may  be  a  stop  put  to  the  assertions  of  those  who  main- 
tain that  they  are  created  for  a  moment  and  annihilated.  As  for  their  orders, 
doubtless  some  are  higher  than  others ;  see  our  Commentary  on  Ezekiel,  chap,  i,  and 
Ps.  cvi.  I.  Observe,  too,  that  in  this  chapter  he  says  of  one  like  the  similitude  of  a 
man,  and  tells  us  that  he  came  near  him,  and  was  not  afraid,  whereas  he  was  terrified 
and  alarmed  by  the  great  angel;  such  things  are  common  in  our  books ;  and 
their  powers  are  limited  according  as  the  Creator  has  given  them.  Observe  that 
when  Jacob  wrestled  with  the  angel,  the  angel  was  at  the  time  unable  to  get  rid  of 
him  (Gen.  xxxii.  26).  Though  their  forms  be  terrible,  yet  God  has  given  the  children 
of  men  power  to  behold  them,  save  the  great  and  mighty  Glory  which  the  blessed 
Apostle  asked  God  to  shew  him,  when  He  said  '  thou  canst  not,'  etc.  (Ex.  xxxiii.  20). 
This  is  a  concise  account  of  this  matter ;  we  should  gladly  elucidate  what  ^e  have 
said  on  this  subject  in  other  places  ;  it  would  not,  however,  be  proper  to  introduce 
that  subject  in  this  place. 

I    stood   up  to    confirm  :    the    province    is    Michael's,    wherein    this    angel 
helped  him. 

i  ["-30 


58  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [XI.  2. 

2.  After  Cyrus  came  four  kings  :  sc.  Ahasuerus  (Mordecai's  patron),  Artaxerxes  the 
Less,  Darius  the  Persian ;  these  are  the  three. 

And  the  foiirth  :  i.  e.  Artaxerxes,  patron  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah. 

Shall  be  far  richer  :  he  already  told  us  that  Cyrus  got  the  treasures  of  the  kings, 
and  was  exceedingly  rich  (Is.  xlv.  3) ;  and  the  same  wealth  is  asserted  of  Artaxerxes 
in  Esth.  i.  4.  In  this  verse  he  tells  us  that  Artaxerxes  was  richer  than  all  the  Persian 
kings,  and  that  he  abode  in  his  kingdom  longer  than  the  others,  seeing  that  he  reigned 
thirty-three  years.  Then  he  tells  him  that  when  he  reaches  the  height  of  his  wealth, 
his  kingdom  will  terminate,  and  all  will  accrue  to  the  king  of  Javan :  he  shall  stir  up 
all.     This  was  not  told  in  the  Dream,  nor  in  the  Vision,  but  only  here. 

3.  And  there  shall  stand  up  :  i.  e.  shall  be  established  on  the  throne. 

A  mighty  king :  the  one  called  in  the  dream  *  a  notable  horn  between  his  eyes:' 
i.  e.  Alexander ;  called  mighty  because  he  took  great  cities ;  his  history  is  well 
known. 

That  shall  rule  :  the  Persians  ruled  three  quarters,  see  on  chap.  viii.  4  etc.,  but 
Alexander  all  four  (ii.  39). 

And  shall  do  according  to  his  will :  cp.  ver.  19,  of  Nebuchadnezzar. 

4.  His  kingdom  shall  be  broken :  the  government  was  disturbed  on  Alexander's 
death.  And  shall  be  divided :  with  reference  to  the  dispute  between  his  generals, 
and  the  compromise  by  which  each  of  the  princes  was  to  take  one  quarter  of 
the  globe ;  the  reason  of  this  being  his  having  left  no  son  (and  not  for  his 
posterity). 

Neither  like  tmto  his  government :  in  spite  of  these  four  holding  the  four 
quarters  of  the  globe,  they  had  no  royal  control  or  might  like  Alexander's. 

For  his  kingdom  shall  be  broken :  the  kingdom  of  the  Greeks,  to  which 
belonged  the  four  quarters  of  the  globe,  shall  be  shattered,  dynasty  after  dynasty 
springing  up  on  the  death  of  these  four,  until  180  years  were  completed,  according 
to  the  historical  records. 

And  to  others  besides  these  :  meaning  that  there  arose  after  these  a  dynasty 
which  discarded  the  traditions  of  its  predecessors.  These  have  been  already  men- 
tioned in  the  words  '  when  sin  is  completed.'  They  were  sinners,  i.  e.  apostates,  in 
respect  of  the  traditions,  [and  usurpers]  in  respect  of  the  government. 

5.  Observe  that  the  kingdom  was  divided  between  four,  each  one  taking  a  quarter, 
like  those  who  were  mentioned  above.  This  is  seen  from  the  expressions  king  of  the 
north,  king  of  the  south  (which  we  shall  clearly  explain  lower  down) ;  although  of 
the  four  none  are  mentioned  save  the  king  of  the  north  and  the  king  of  the  south. 
Probably  therefore  the  kings  of  the  west  and  of  the  east  remained  quietly  in  their 
respective  quarters,  not  seeking  to  acquire  any  other,  and  there  was  no  war  between 
them  ;  whence  the  Scripture  does  not  mention  them  ;  whereas  it  mentions  the  kings 
of  the  south  and  of  the  north,  because  they  were  engaged  in  eventful  wars.  Or 
possibly  the  kings  of  the  west  and  east  were  in  dependence  respectively  on  the  other 
two  kings. 


XI.  7.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  59 

And  of  his  princes :  said  to  be  one  of  the  princes  of  the  king  who  preceded 
him ;  the  king  of  the  south  who  preceded  him  being  a  Greek,  and  this  one  of  the 
(latter's)  princes.  Otherwise,  one  of  the  princes  of  the  king  of  the  north,  who 
rebelled  and  strengthened  himself  against  the  king  of  the  north,  which  is  likely, 
and  is  confirmed  by  the  following  verse. 

He  shall  be  strong  above  him :  the  king  of  the  south  above  the  king  of 
the  north. 

A  great  dominion  :  his  realm  shall  be  greater  and  wider  than  that  of  any  other 
sovereign  ;  he  being,  in  fact,  the  king  of  Rome  (who  is  the  king  of  the  south),  and  this 
the  first  king  who  arose  over  them. 

6.  At  the  end  of  years  :  he  does  not  say  how  many ;  certain  years  during  which 
there  was  an  understanding  between  the  two ;  till  the  king  of  the  north  rebelled 
against  the  king  of  the  south,  on  account  of  which  the  king  of  the  south  sent  armies 
to  the  king  of  the  north.  It  is  like  what  happened  to  Sodom  with  Kedorlaomer, 
when  they  obeyed  him  for  twelve  years,  then  rebelled,  and  were  assailed  by  him. 

Shall  join  themselves  together  :   for  battle  ;  cp.  Gen.  xiv.  3. 

And  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  the  south :  i.  e.  the  whole  of  his  host ; 
compare  the  phrases  '  Daughter  of  Egypt,'  '  Daughter  of  Tyre,'  etc. 

To  make  an  agreement :  i.  e.  to  desire  him  to  deal  peacefully  with  him  again 
and  continue  in  his  previous  allegiance  ;  like  what  Sennacherib,  king  of  Asshur, 
demanded  of  Hezekiah.  Possibly  he  desired  him  to  confess  the  former's  faith,  the 
king  of  the  north  being  an  idolater  ;  to  which  the  king  of  the  north  would  not  agree, 
but  came  out  to  fight  the  army  of  the  king  of  the  south  ;  when  the  army  of  the  king 
of  the  south  could  not  stand  before  the  king  of  the  north  (but  she  shall  not  retain 
the  strength  of  her  arm). 

The  arm  is  the  armies  of  the  king  of  the  south,  which  shall  flee  before  the  king 
of  the  north,  and  afterwards  capitulate  (but  she  shall  be  given  up,  etc.). 

She  shall  be  given  up  refers  to  the  army. 

They  that  brought  her  to  the  captains  of  the  host. 

He  that  begat  her  to  the  general  of  the  army  appointed  by  the  king  of  the 
south  to  lead  the  army,  who  went  with  it ;  the  king  himself  not  going  with  it, 
on  account  of  one  of  two  possible  circumstances ;  either  he  despised  the  king 
of  the  north,  and  was  assured  in  his  mind  that  his  army  would  rout  the  king  of  the 
north ;  or,  perhaps,  he  was  afraid  lest,  if  he  departed  out  of  his  realm,  his  affairs 
might  become  disturbed ;  whence  he  did  not  stir  from  his  place. 

And  he  that  strengthened  her  in  the  times :  referring  to  certain  persons  who 
were  amongst  his  army  by  way  of  giving  aid,  but  not  actually  belonging  to  his  army, 
since  he  merely  desired  their  assistance  for  money  to  be  paid  them  ;  when  they  were 
required  they  went  with  his  army,  and  afterwards  returned  to  their  place.  Hence  the 
phrase. 

7,  8.  The  king  of  the  south  had  no  power  to  face  the  king  of  the  north,  but 
died  defeated.    After  his  death  there  arose  there  another  king  in  his  stead. 

i  2 


6o  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [XI.  9. 

Out  of  a  shoot  of  her  roots :  not  his  son  therefore,  yet  one  of  the  royal  seed, 
and  related  to  him  ;  a  man  of  valour  who  took  the  command  of  the  army  and 
went  with  it,  fearing  lest  there  might  overtake  his  army  what  overtook  the  former. 

And  he  shall  come  iinto  the  army :  i.  e.  the  army  which  had  capitulated  to 
the  king  of  the  north  ;  and  when  they  see  him  arrived,  they  shall  return  to  him,  and 
thereupon  he  shall  strengthen  himself  and  shall  come  to  the  fortified  cities  of  the  king 
of  the  north,  especially  the  capital  city. 

And  shall  deal  with  them  :  i.  e.  do  battle  with  them,  and  prevail  against  them, 
and  kill  certain  of  them,  i.  e.  of  the  soldiers. 

Next  he  tells  us  how  he  shall  take  their  idols,  out  of  spite  against  them  ;  it  is  like 
what  the  king  of  Asshur  did  with  the  calves  of  Israel  (Hos.  x.  6). 

With  their  princes :  the  king's  lords  and  lieutenants. 

The  king  did  not  fall  into  his  hands,  either,  as  some  think,  because  he  fled, 
or  because  he  sent  messengers,  and  agreed  to  give  him  what  the  previous  king 
desired,  as  we  explained  in  ver.  6  b.  This  is  most  probable  to  my  mind.  Now  the 
king  of  the  south  did  not  accept  these  terms  from  the  king  of  the  north  till  after 
he  had  taken  their  idols  with  the  whole  of  their  treasures,  that  there  might  be  no 
power  left  them,  and  the  king  of  the  north  might  be  left  very  weak,  and  thereupon  be 
compelled  to  absolute  obedience  to  the  king  of  the  south. 

9.  The  king  of  the  north  shall  come  under  the  sway  of  the  king  of  the  south,  and 
after  that  the  king  of  the  south  shall  return  to  his  land. 

And  he  shall  continue  some  years :  i.  e.  after  the  death  of  the  king  of  the 
north  (cp.  Gen.  xxi.  21) ;  signifying  that  he  shall  remain  alive.  The  first  king  of  the 
south  then  will  die  while  the  king  of  the  north  is  alive  ;  then  that  king  of  the  north 
will  die  during  the  lifetime  of  the  second  king  of  the  south ;  dying  humbled  and 
paying  submission  to  the  king  of  the  south. 

10-12.  We  know  that  the  first  king  of  the  south  began  by  being  mighty,  and  was 
afterwards  stricken  :  and  that  the  king  of  the  north  was  weak  at  first,  and  then  pre- 
vailed against  the  king  of  the  south,  and  afterwards  is  to  be  oppressed  once  more 
beneath  the  hand  of  the  king  of  the  south,  and  to  die  in  that  condition,  his  first  state 
being  weak,  and  his  last  state  weak.  Now  he  tells  us  that  after  his  death  his  sons  shall 
arise  and  take  possession  of  the  kingdom ;  he  does  not  tell  us  their  number  ;  however 
they  are  governors,  each  having  an  army  under  him,  one  of  them  being  chief  in  power 
with  the  others  beneath  him.  And  they  said  :  *  Let  us  do  as  the  second  king  of  the 
south  did,  and  let  us  take  vengeance  from  him  for  our  father ; '  and  they  all  agreed 
thereto. 

And  they  shall  contend :  he  does  not  say  for  what :  I  imagine  that  they  sent 
him  messengers  demanding  that  he  should  yield  up  the  cities  which  he  took  from  their 
father,  or  restore  some  of  the  tribute  which  he  imposed  upon  him  ;  to  this  he  did  not 
consent :  whereupon  they  collected  an  army  and  began  to  occupy  city  after  city  of  the 
dominions  of  the  king  of  the  south,  the  king  of  the  south  not  moving  from  his  place 
for  fear  of  them. 


XI.  14.1  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  6 1 

First  he  says  and  his  sons  shall  contend,  to  signify  that  they  sent  messengers  to 
the  king  of  the  south  ;  afterwards  and  he  shall  come  on  and  overflow,  referring 
to  the  one  of  them  who  was  most  illustrious. 

And  he  shall  return  and  contend :  i.  e.  first  he  took  certain  cities  of  the  king 
of  the  south,  which  came  into  his  power  ;  but  he  did  not  venture  to  come  to  the 
capital  of  the  king  of  the  south ;  yet  when  he  saw  that  the  king  of  the  south  did  not 
stir  from  his  place,  he  did  venture,  and  assailed  him  in  his  capital ;  even  to  his 
fortress. 

Thereupon  the  king  of  the  south  was  compelled  to  come  out  against  him. 

And  shall  fight  with  him,  even  with  the  king  of  the  north  :  probably 
he  directed  his  energies  first  against  the  armies,  then  against  the  king  himself; 
when  the  latter  saw  himself  assailed  he  set  up  in  his  face  a  mighty  army,  to  repel 
the  king  of  the  south  or,  if  possible,  to  defeat  him.  Thereupon  the  king  of  the 
south  becomes  master  of  the  mighty  army  gathered  by  the  king  of  the  north, 
and  his  heart  is  lifted  up,  and  the  king  of  the  north  flees  by  himself  and  returns  to 
his  city. 

And  he  shall  cast  down  tens  of  thousands :  i.  e.  he  took  captive  as  many  as  he 
wished  of  the  army  of  the  king  of  the  north,  and  slew  a  multitude  of  the  soldiers  and 
of  others. 

And  there  shall  not  prevail :  i.  e.  no  one  shall  be  able  to  stand  before  him  ;  all 
shall  flee  before  him.  During  a  long  period  he  shall  be  like  this  ; — I  am  inclined  to 
think  the  KING  of  the  SOUTH  is  meant,  who  burnt  the  Temple  and  carried  our  people 
captive  ;  from  which  time  the  Romans  have  been  strong  and  their  empire  has  pre- 
vailed, and  has  become  a  '  mighty  terrible  monster.'  You  must  know  that  these  wars 
covered  many  years,  about  two  hundred;  the  pronouns  therefore  refer  not  to  individuals, 
but  to  the  empire. 

13.  Probably  this  king  of  the  north  is  not  the  same  as  the  one  who  fled.  He  is 
to  gather  armies  more  nimierous  than  the  former,  which  were  taken  by  the  king 
of  the  south. 

And  at  the  end  of  the  times,  years  (instead  of  '  at  the  end  of  years ') 
refers  to  the  prophecy  of  the  seventy  weeks.  Or,  it  may  mean  after  the  end  of  years 
during  which  there  was  an  agreement  between  them,  made  after  the  rout,  and  they 
obeyed  the  king  of  the  south  because  of  his  power ;  after  the  end  of  this  period  the 
king  of  the  north  shall  collect  these  armies  and  assail  the  king  of  the  south,  v.  infra. 

14.  In  ver.  13  he  said  at  the  end  of  the  times,  years  :  now  he  goes  back  and  tells 
us  how  in  those  times  the  power  of  the  king  of  the  south  shall  be  great,  and  he  shall 
collect  mighty  armies,  whereas  the  king  of  the  north  shall  be  low. 

The  children  of  the  breakers  of  thy  people  refers,  it  is  said,  to  the  followers  of 
Jesus,  said  by  the  Christians  to  be  the  Messiah ;   those  followers  who  made  the 
Gospel :  their  names  are  well  known  : 
i.  Matthew  the  publican, 
ii.  Mark  the  fisherman. 


62  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [XI.  15. 

iii.  Luke  the  physician,  disciple  of  Paulus  Abu-Shaoul. 
iv.  John,  kinsman  of  Jesus,  entrusted  by  him  with  certain  powers. 
These  are  called  children  of  the  breakers  of  thy  people  because  they  made  a  breach 
in  the  religion  ;  and  doubtless  multitudes  of  Israelites  became  Christians  with  them. 

Shall  lift  themselves  up :  in  that  they  got  a  great  and  mighty  station,  and 
a  mighty  name. 

To  establish  :  i.  e.  their  purpose  was  to  establish  the  vision  in  Jesus'  favour,  as 
is  known  from  their  profession  in  their  gospels  and  records. 

But  they  shall  fall :  if  this  refers  to  the  followers  of  Jesus,  it  will  mean  '  they 
shall  leave  the  religion  of  Israel;'  if  to  the  nation,  then  it  means  that  Israel  after  this 
shall  fall,  being  punished  for  the  murder  of  God.  How  many  Israelites  will  have 
been  slain  from  that  time  till  God  deliver  His  people !  That  then  will  be  the  meaning 
of  they  shall  fall :  signifying  that  the  ruin  of  Israel  was  by  them  and  through  them. 
First  we  were  ruined  by  our  kings  and  false  prophets,  who  were  the  cause  of  the 
cessation  of  our  empire  and  of  our  captivity  ;  then  these  Christians  have  been  the 
cause  of  our  ruin  and  destruction  during  the  Captivity ;  and  some  went  astray  at  the 
beginning  of  the  empire  of  the  Little  Horn,  and  also  ruined  us. 

15.  After  the  digression  in  which  he  introduces  the  history  of  Jesus  and  his 
followers,  and  what  is  to  come  upon  us  through  them,  he  goes  back  and  finishes  what 
becomes  of  the  king  of  the  north  after  he  has  collected  the  armies.  The  words 
so  the  king  of  the  north  shall  come  are  to  be  connected  with  and  he  shall 
come  on  in  ver.  13  b.  The  king  of  the  north  is  to  come  to  the  land  of  Rome 
and  besiege  the  capital  city  and  take  it  (and,  take  a  well-fenced  city) ;  i.  e. 
Constantinople. 

And  the  arms  of  the  south  :  i.  e.  *  the  many  who  shall  stand  up '  (ver.  14),  great 
armies  collected  by  the  king  of  the  south  to  help  him. 

His  chosen  people  :  hosts  wherein  he  placed  especial  confidence.  These,  too, 
cannot  stand  before  the  king  of  the  north,  who  slays  multitudes  of  the  hosts  of  the 
king  of  the  south,  while  many  more  desert  to  him  and  help  him  ;  v.  infra. 

16.  He  that  cometh  unto  him :  the  deserters  from  the  king  of  the  south ; 
mighty  men  of  valour,  who  will  do  the  will  of  the  king  of  the  north,  and  open  gates 
for  him.  He  will  make  them  governors  in  the  territory  of  Rome,  whereafter  none  of 
the  countries  of  the  king  of  the  south  shall  stand  before  him.  At  that  time  the 
Romans  will  have  spread  over  the  land  of  Israel,  and  be  in  possession  of  it,  especially 
of  the  holy  city,  having  great  hosts  in  it ;  and  the  king  of  the  north  shall  assail  them 
with  his  armies,  and  shall  remain  in  the  land  of  Israel  a  long  time,  and  shall  slay  a 
multitude  of  Romans  (and  shall  destroy  with  his  hand). 

17.  The  king  of  the  north  shall  attack  the  fortresses  of  the  king  of  the  south  with 
his  armed  men. 

And  upright  ones  with  him :  (according  to  some)  certain  Israelitish  Scribes 
etc.  who  shall  be  with  him,  and  inform  him  of  what  is  written  concerning  his 
invasion,  whose  words  he  shall  believe  and  do  thereafter. 


XI.  20.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  6'>, 

The  daughter  of  the  women  :  the  holy  city,  it  is  said  ;  signifying  that  he  is  to 
ravage  certain  places  consecrated  to  the  Roman  worship,  and  their  royal  palace; 
maybe  God  will  give  him  power  over  the  king  of  the  south,  and  let  him  deal  thus 
with  him,  in  return  for  what  the  king  of  the  south  did  in  the  Second  Temple,  and 
with  Israel ;  so  that  this  will  be  some  consolation  to  His  people. 

Then  he  tells  us  that  the  king  of  the  north  will  not  stay  in  Syria,  nor  shall  the 
country  remain  under  his  authority ;  he  shall  turn  away  thence  to  another  place,  and 
the  Romans  shall  be  established  there  as  before. 

1 8.  He  shall  invade  the  islands  belonging  to  the  king  of  the  south :  referring  perhaps 
to  the  'frontier-land,'  sc.  Tarsus,  Cyprus,  etc.,  which  he  shall  conquer,  slaying  and 
plundering,  not  intending  to  remain  in  the  territory  of  the  south,  but  only  to  take 
reprisals  for  what  the  king  of  the  south  did  to  him.  The  king  of  the  south  had  put  to 
shame  the  king  of  the  north  by  what  he  had  done  to  him  when  he  had  assailed  him 
in  his  fortress  :  so  when  the  king  of  the  north  does  all  this  to  the  king  of  the  south, 
the  reproach  offered  by  the  latter  will  be  taken  away.  A  captain,  sc.  the  king  of  the 
north,  shall  cause  the  reproach  offered  by  him  to  cease. 

Yea,  moreover,  he  shall  cause  his  reproach  to  turn  upon  him :  i.  e.  not  only 
does  he  cause  the  reproach  offered  by  him  to  cease,  but  in  his  turn  he  brings  reproach 
upon  the  king  of  the  south.  The  king  of  the  south,  who  burnt  the  holy  city,  had 
not  assailed  the  king  of  the  north  ;  only  after  he  had  been  assailed  by  the  latter  did 
he  do  as  described  to  the  latter's  army.  This  king,  on  the  other  hand,  invades  his  capital, 
kiUs  his  soldiers,  takes  many  cities,  and  massacres  their  inhabitants  ;  thus  doing  more 
than  the  king  of  the  south  had  done  to  him.     Hence  he  says  yea,  moreover,  etc. 

The  above  has  been  an  account  of  the  relations  between  the  king  of  the  north  and 
the  king  of  the  south,  including  three  events : 

i.  and  ii.  The  armies  of  the  king  of  the  south  assail  the  king  of  the  north, 
iii.  The  king  of  the  north  assails  the  king  of  the  south. 
The  first  and  second  of  these  campaigns  were  won  by  the  king  of  the  south  against 
the  king  of  the  north ;  in  the  third  the  reverse  took  place.  The  king  of  the  south 
conquered  twice,  the  king  of  the  north  once.  These  three  events  took  place  during 
a  long  period,  more  than  three  hundred  years,  as  we  have  explained  above.  The 
seat  of  the  king  of  the  north  was  in  the  province  of  Baghdad.  This  is  the  last  war 
between  the  two  kings. 

19.  After  doing  all  this  he  shall  return  to  Baghdad,  his  royal  seat :  and  after- 
wards shall  stumble  in  the  place  of  his  throne ;  maybe  some  of  his  servants  shall 
slay  him,  and  the  matter  be  concealed  and  not  known  about  (and  shall  not  be 
found). 

20.  In  his  place:  i.e.  the  second  shall  sit  in  the  place  of  the  first ;  had^he  not 
stated  this,  it  might  have  been  in  another  place.  There  shall  sit  then  in  his  place 
another  without  vigour  or  victory  or  war.     Two  facts  are  told  us  about  him  : 

i.  Causing  the  exactor  to  pass, 
ii.  Glory  of  the  kingdom. 


64  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [XI.  21. 

With  regard  to  the  first,  some  scholars  have  asserted  that  he  aboHshed  the  taxes, 
and  that  during  his  time  there  was  no  trouble,  vexation  or  affliction  imposed  by  him  on 
the  people.  Other  scholars  assert  that  it  is  of  him  that  it  is  recorded  that  he  obliged 
the  people  to  lock  their  doors  at  midday,  and  to  occupy  themselves  with  eating  and 
drinking ;  the  weak  among  them  having  supplies  from  the  royal  table ;  so  that  the 
time  passed  in  eating,  drinking,  amusement,  enjoyment,  and  the  wearing  of  new 
and  fine  apparel.  Whence  the  words  the  glory  of  the  kingdom..  He  tells  us 
however  that  his  time  will  not  be  long  (within  few  days) ;  he  shall  perish  without 
encounter  or  war.  Those  who  know  this  history  tell  us  that  the  Arabs  seized  the 
place  while  the  people  were  engaged  in  eating  and  drinking.  They  seized  the  king  and 
slew  him.  He  was  last  of  the  Magus  who  reigned  in  Baghdad ;  from  whom  it  was 
taken  by  the  Arab  kings,  who  still  hold  it 

21.  A  contemptible  person:  every  king  of  these  dynasties  hitherto  had 
possessed  some  spirit  and  generosity  save  this  one,  who  had  no  sort  of  it.  His  story  is 
well  known,  so  we  need  not  dilate  on  it. 

He  shall  come  with  security:  i.e.  he  shall  enter  city  after  city  without  war  or 
siege,  which  his  predecessors  had  used. 

And  shaU  obtain  the  kingdom  by  flatteries  :  i.e.  his  professed  *  visions,'  and 
the  rest  of  what  was  described  in  chap,  vii,  '  the  mouth  that  speaketh  great  things,'  etc. ; 
and  in  chap,  x,  *  understanding  dark  sayings.' 

22.  And  the  arms  of  a  flood :  great  armies  of  the  king  of  the  north,  and  the 
armies  of  Rome  also.    They  shall  flee  before  him  and  be  dispersed. 

And  with  the  prince  of  the  covenant :  said  to  be  the  ruler  of  Rome,  compare 
jx.  26  ;  called  of  the  covenant  because  he  had  made  a  covenant  with  Israel,  ibid.  27. 
Others  make  it  refer  to  the  kings  of  Israel^  beneath  whom  the  sons  of  David  were 
afflicted. 

23.  And  after  the  league :  said  to  refer  to  a  follower  of  the  *  Man  of  Wind ' 
(Muhammad),  Omar  one  of  the '  ten.'  He  is  to  deal  deceitfully  with  Israel,  and  others ; 
their  story  is  well  known.  He  shall  come  up  and  become  strong  with  a  few 
helpers. 

24.  With  seotirity  in  verse  21  referred  to  the  'Man  of  Wind;'  here  it  refers 
to  Omar. 

The  fattest  places  of  the  province :  the  great  cities  wherein  dwell  the  rich. 

He  shall  do,  etc. :  in  the  way  of  conquest  and  massacre.  His  predecessors,  he 
says,  reached  no  such  eminence  as  he. 

He  shall  scatter  among  them  prey,  etc. :  he  himself  was  satisfied  with  meagre 
food,  coarse  raiment,  and  humble  equipage.  Whenever  he  took  a  city  and  plundered 
it,  he  relinquished  the  whole  of  the  plunder  to  the  soldiery,  and  took  none  of  it  for 
himself. 

Prey  may  refer  to  men,  whom  he  used  to  take  captive ;  or  to  precious  objects  and 
instruments. 

Spoil:  garments. 


XI.  27.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  6^ 

Substance :  beasts  of  burden,  cattle  and  sheep. 

Against  the  strongholds:  certain  fortresses  in  the  province  of  'Iraq,  which 
belonged  to  the  king  of  the  north,  which  he  took  by  plots  and  strategy. 

Even  for  a  time :  till  the  end  of  \i\%  progress ;  when  the  time  of  his  retrogression 
comes,  his  position  will  be  reversed. 

25.  And  he  shall  stir  up  his  power:  this  means  that  the  king  of  the  south  had 
made  no  preparations,  while  he  had  with  him  only  the  handful  of  men  who  were  with  him 
at  the  beginning  of  his  career  (with  a  few  men,  ver.  23) ;  but  it  came  to  pass  that  fresh 
people  became  Moslems  continually,  so  that  his  army  grew  great. 

This  battle  was  fought  between  Omar  ibn  El-Khattab  and  the  Romans  in  Syria. 
Omar,  the  historians  say,  entered  Jerusalem,  and  the  king  of  Rome  made  ready  to 
fight  with  him,  and  they  arrayed  battle  in  the  plain  of 'Amwas,  near  Jerusalem.  Omar 
is  said  to  have  had  a  mighty  army,  and  for  this  reason  the  king  of  the  south  met 
him  also  with  a  mighty  army,  but  the  Roman  army  was  greater  than  the  Moslem,  as  is 
implied  by  the  additional  words  in  the  text. 

And  he  shall  not  stand  :  sc.  the  army  of  the  king  of  the  south.  Indeed  it  took 
to  flight  as  soon  as  they  joined  battle. 

For  he  shall  forecast:  his  army  shall.  When  they  saw  the  Moslem  general 
approach  they  abandoned  the  king  of  the  south ;  even  his  chosen  youths  who  were 
fed  from  his  table  destroyed  him  :  for  they  were  not  true  to  him  in  the  war. 

Thereupon  the  Moslems  became  masters  of  the  Romans,  and  slew  a  vast  number 
of  them  (many  shall  fall  down  slain) ;  and  the  Moslems  took  the  land  of  Israel 
from  the  Romans,  and  hold  it  to  this  day. 

27.  He  said  above  they  set  not  upon  him  (ver.  21) ;  and  indeed  so  long  as  he  had 
not  taken  the  holy  city  from  the  Romans  he  does  not  call  him  their  king.  Now  they 
have  taken  it,  he  calls  him  so. 

Both  these  kings :  i.  e.  of  Arabia  and  Rome. 

Their  hearts  shall  be  to  do  mischief:  i.e.  they  shall  do  some  harm  to 
Israel,  each  of  them,  in  some  fashion ;  as  it  is  well  known  that  the  Moslems  and 
Christians  do. 

Against  one  table  :  to  be  referred,  it  is  said,  to  Israel ;  called  one  table  because 
Edom  and  Ishmael  eat  each  other's  food.  Compare  ii.  43  with  comm.  There  he 
spoke  of  their  mixing  in  marriage  ;  no  less  do  they  mix  in  the  matter  of  food  ;  Isaiah 
speaks  of  both,  chap.  Ixvi.  17,  where  they  that  sanctify  themselves  are  the  uncircummsed, 
who  profess  sanctity  and  speak  of  Saint  So-and-so,  and  how  the  time  of  sanctification 
is  come,  and  have  offerings,  and  profess  that  they  have  holy  priests,  and  baptismal 
water,  and  consequently  do  not  wash  off  pollution.  As  for  the  Moslems  they  do  not 
hold  that  view,  but  do  wash  after  pollution,  and  consequently  are  called  by  the  prophet 
them  that  purify  themselves.  Consequently  the  uncircumcised  use  the  word  sanctity, 
and  the  others  the  v^oxdi.  purity.  To  the  gardens  refers  to  the  fact  that  both  profess 
that  the  'Garden'  (i.  e.  Paradise)  is  for  them,  as  is  stated  in  their  books  and  commonly 
declared  by  them.   Behind  one  in  the  midst  refers  to  the  fact  that  they  all  agree  that  the 

k  [II.  3-] 


66  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [XI.  28. 

Law  is  superseded,  and  that  another  system  has  been  delivered  since,  that  system  being 
a  religion  not  to  be  superseded  by  another.  So  when  Islam  started,  they  said  of  the 
Law  just  what  the  Christians  had  said ;  further  asserting  that  the  Book  of  their 
founder  had  superseded  the  religion  of  the  Christians  with  another.  Then  he  informs 
us  that  the  professors  of  sanctity  eat  swine^s  flssh,  while  the  professors  of  purity  eat 
abominations  and  the  mouse.  For  although  Islam  forbids  swine's  flesh,  still  otherwise 
they  do  not  abstain  from  eating  the  food  of  the  uncircumcised,  so  that  they  may  be 
said  to  eat  at  one  table,  whereas  Israel  form  one  table,  since  they  eat  neither  swine's 
flesh  nor  abominations  nor  the  mouse.  From  this  point  of  view  therefore  the  words 
at  one  table  refer  to  Israel.  If  we  can  make  at  one  table  signify  two  things,  one  will 
be  that  they  j//  at  one  table,  the  other  that  they  lie  against  God  and  His  people. 

It  shall  not  prosper:  i.e.  Israel;  their  affairs  shall  not  prosper,  and  they  shall 
be  afflicted  and  abandoned. 

The  end  remaineth  unto  the  time:  i.e.  until  the  end  of  the  four  kingdoms 
be  accomplished ;  when  Edom  and  Ishmael  shall  fail  and  turn  back,  and  Israel 
prosper.  The  verse  covers  the  long  period  from  the  rise  of  Islam  to  the  end  of  the 
Captivity. 

28.  The  speaker  returns  to  complete  what  preceded.  (In  the  preceding  verse  the 
ruin  and  death  which  were  to  fall  on  the  king  of  the  south  were  mentioned.)  He  informs 
us  how  the  ruler  of  Islam  will  return  to  the  place  where  his  station  was;  this  is  said 
to  have  been  Damascus,  whither  therefore  he  returned,  with  great  riches  plundered 
from  the  army  of  the  king  of  the  south. 

And  his  heart  shall  be  to  hurt  Israel ;  cp.  ver.  27  a.  The  person  alluded  to  is 
said  to  have  been  a  bitter  enemy  of  Israel  (Omar  ibn  El-Khattab). 

And  he  shall  do  his  pleasure  in  Israel  by  decrees  which  he  proclaimed  against 
them.  These  are  the  Jews  established  in  the  holy  city.  After  this  he  shall  return  to 
his  own  city. 

This  was  the  battle  which  resulted  unfavourably  to  the  king  of  Rome  at  the 
holy  city. 

29.  With  this  verse  ends  the  account  of  what  happened  at  the  rise  of  the  power  of 
Ishmael.  From  this  verse  commences  the  notice  of  what  is  to  happen  at  the  close 
of  their  power.  In  the  previous  verse  he  said  the  end  remaineth  iinto  the 
time,  signifying  that  when  that  time  appointed  came,  and  he  arrived  at  the  end 
of  his  career,  he  should  return,  and  come  into  the  south,  i.e.  enter  into  the 
Roman  territory.  This  began  some  years  ago  in  the  western  direction,  when  the  king 
of  the  west,  who  is  now  the  king  of  Egypt,  sent  armies  into  the  Roman  territory. 

But  it  shall  not  be  as  the  former  refers  to  what  happened  at  the  rise  of  his 
dynasty  :   (i)  his  overthrowing  three  thrones  (chap.  vii.  5);  (2)  supra  25. 

Or  as  the  latter  refers  to  what  shall  be  explained  on  ver.  40.  The  first  battles 
were  all  advantageous  to  Ishmael  and  against  the  king  of  the  south.  The  last  shall 
be  all  advantageous  to  the  king  of  the  south  and  against  Ishmael.  This  intermediate 
battle  shall  be  unlike  either,  and  of  an  intermediate  kind. 


XI.  31.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  6"] 

30.  There  shall  enter  into  it  inhabitants  of  the  desert  and  Cyprians  refers 
perhaps  to  their  entering  into  his  religion  ;  or  possibly  under  his  rule. 

And  shall  be  broken :  to  be  construed,  not  with  hhn,  but  with  the  peoj)le  and 
countries;  every  one  of  them  shall  be  overthrown  before  him. 

And  shall  have  indignation  against  the  holy  covenant :  the  king  referred  to 
began  by  assailing  Israel  with  injuries ;  then  he  left  them  ;  at  the  end  he  shall  return 
to  them.     This  is  an  event  in  the  future.     It  has  not  yet  come  to  pass. 

He  shall  even  return  and  have  regard  unto  them  that  forsake  refers  to 
certain  Israelites  who  abandoned  the  religion  of  Israel  and  entered  into  his  religion, 
to  whom  he  will  shew  favour.  Evidently  he  will  require  them  to  abandon  their  religion  : 
some  will  remain  true  to  the  religion  of  Israel,  against  whom  he  will  be  indignant. 
Others  will  abandon  it,  and  enter  his  religion,  to  whom  he  will  shew  favour.  We 
shall  explain  this  at  the  end  of  the  chapter. 

31.  He  tells  us  first  that  he  will  fight  with  the  king  of  the  south  (ver.  29) ;  then 
the  condition  of  Israel  during  his  time  ;  then  he  goes  back  to  tell  us  what  he  will  do 
with  his  people. 

Arms :  certain  hosts  which  shall  penetrate  into  their  holy  place,  and  do  the 
following  things : 

i.  They  shall  profane  the  sanctuary,  even  the  fortress:  i.e.  the  place  men- 
tioned in  chap.  viii.  1 1. 

The  term  there  used  was  '  cast  down  ; '  here,  profane.  The  first  signifies  that  he 
shall  lay  it  waste,  and  raze  it  to  the  ground ;  the  second,  that  their  dead  bodies  shall 
be  thrown  into  it,  so  that  it  shall  become  like  a  dung-pit  or  dirt -heap. 

ii.  They  shall  remove  the  continual:  i.e.  they  shall  put  a  stop  to  the  Ha^g 
(pilgrimage) ;  men  shall  not  go  on  pilgrimages  thither  thereafter,  nor  pray  as  was  their 
wont,  nor  celebrate  the  tenth  day  according  to  their  custom ;  it  is  called  continual 
because  the  institution  was  perpetual ;  they  never  relaxed  the  liag^.  Compare  viii.  1 1, 
except  that  here  is  added — 

iii.  And  they  shall  make  the  abomination  desolate  :  most  probably  referring 
to  the  images  in  that  house  (cp.  2  Kings  xi.  8,  and  Deut.  xxix.  17).  These  images 
were  very  ancient ;  he  had  not  been  able  to  remove  them  originally,  so  he  removed 
them  now.  Reference  is  made  to  the  same  subject  in  Ps.  Ixxiii.  20.  Observe  that  in 
the  '  Vision '  he  mentioned  several  things  collectively  which  here  he  separates.  If  the 
words  they  shall  make  the  abomination  desolate  refer  to  the  image  itself,  it  must 
mean  that  it  will  be  left  fallen,  after  having  been  erect  and  protected  ;  but  if  we  refer 
them  to  its  place,  then  the  meaning  will  be  that  place  will  be  left  desolate,  waste, 
unapproached ;  and  this  is  alluded  to  by  the  prophet  Isaiah  in  his  prayer  (xxv.  2), 
where  the  palace  is  the  house,  said  to  belong  to  strangers  because  there  are  in  it 
these  images,  never  to  be  built  for  ever  because  it  is  waste,  and  never  to  be  rebuilt ; 
if,  thirdly,  we  refer  it  to  its  worshippers,  it  will  mean  that  they  will  grieve  at  the  ruin 
that  has  overtaken  their  sanctuary,  even  as  Israel  has  grieved  eyer  since  ruin  overtook 
them,  and  their  sanctuary  was  laid  waste. 

k  2 


68  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [XI.  32. 

32.  A  further  explanation  of  the  words  he  shall  have  regard  unto  them  that 
forsake,  etc. 

He  shall  deceive  them  by  soft,  flattering  words  ;  i.e.  some  shall  go  out  from  our 
people  for  certain  worldly  reasons,  and  shall  take  verses  of  the  Scripture  spoken  con- 
cerning the  Messiah  which  they  shall  divert  to  the  temporal  ruler,  and  shall  interpret 
of  him,  explaining  away  the  words  sabbath  and /east,  ruining  themselves  and  departing 
from  religion.  They  are  said  to  do  wickedly  against  the  covenant  because  they 
do  wrong,  and  shake  off  the  yoke  of  the  law  and  the  covenants  of  Israel. 

But  the  people  that  know  his  God  shall  be  strong  refers  to  certain  Israelites 
who  shall  understand  the  system  of  the  temporal  lord,  and  that  he  has  a  secret  which 
many  Israelites  did  not  understand,  and  so  perished.  But  some — scholars — shall 
investigate  his  religion,  and  see  that  it  is  false,  and  cling  to  the  law,  and  act  according 
to  it,  and  not  depart  from  the  religion  of  Israel  as  others  departed.  The  fulfilment  of 
this  began  in  the  West  many  years  ago,  when  many  Israelites  gave  up  their  religion 
and  adopted  his  ;  as  is  well  known.  Those  who  do  not  give  up  the  faith  are  called 
the  people  that  know  his  God. 

33.  The  wise  are  the  same  as  the  last. 

Shall  instruct  many:  i.e.  they  shall  cause  many  Israelites  to  understand  his 
system,  and  strengthen  their  hands  in  the  religion  of  God,  and  shall  not  abandon  the 
faith.  Now  when  he  sees  that  they  do  not  enter  into  his  religion,  his  wrath  will 
become  fierce  against  them,  as  was  Nebuchadnezzar's  against  Hananiah,  Mishael,  and 
Azariah,  so  that  he  threw  them  into  a  fiery  furnace.  So  will  this  prince  deal  with 
Israel ;  some  he  will  kill  with  the  sword,  others  by  Jirej  some  he  will  afflict  by 
captivity  or  by  plundering  their  slaves  and  property. 

Days  :  the  period  of  a  year  perhaps.    Note  the  order : 

1.  He  shall  have  indignation; 

2.  Arms  shall  stand; 

3.  Such  as  do  wickedly  against  the  covenant. 

This  shews  that  a  tribulation  shall  come  upon  Israel  before  the  devastation  of  the 
house  :  which  the  present  verse  explains. 

They  shall  fall :  the  persons  who  follow  the  wise.  The  wise  being  spoken  of  in 
the  following  verse. 

34.  After  saying  that  they  should  fall,  he  tells  us  that  when  they  shall  fall  they 
shall  be  holpen ;  not  specifying  how.  Some  have  thought  that  God  Almighty  will 
raise  up  for  them  a  Saviour  like  Esther  the  Queen.  Others  suppose  they  will  be 
helped  by  God's  destroying  the  official  commissioned  with  their  hurt. 

But  many  shall  join  themselves  unto  them  refers  perhaps  to  the  deserters ; 
this  particular  word  being  used  of  those  who  enter  a  religion ;  cp.  Is.  Ivi.  6.  In  spite 
then  of  God's  helping  those  who  fall  *  by  the  sword  and  the  flame,'  many  will  adopt 
this  man's  religion,  owing  to  the  flattery  which  he  will  employ  with  them.  With  these 
flatteries  compare  supra  21.  This  prince  then,  too,  hz.s  Jlattenes  whereby  he  draws 
men  into  his  faith. 


XI.  36.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  69 

35.  He  tells  us  first  what  will  happen  to  the  followers  of  the  teachers,  how  they 
shall  fall,  but  how  God  will  help  them  and  deal  mercifully  with  them ;  then  what  he 
will  do  with  the  wise  themselves.     They  too,  he  says,  will  fall. 

The  terms  to  refine  and  to  purify  etc.  are  used  of  the  teachers,  but  not  of 
their  followers,  because  the  followers  ra&cely  follow  their  predecessors,  and  when  they 
see  the  teachers  fall,  their  hands  will  be  weakened.  If  the  falling  of  the  teachers  be 
by  sword  and  flame,  they  will  say  '  if  God  has  delivered  over  our  teachers,  what  can 
we  expect  ? '  Their  hands  will  therefore  be  weakened,  for  they  will  say  *  if  our  religion 
were  true,  God  would  not  have  delivered  up  our  teachers,  even  as  He  did  not  deliver  up 
Hananiah,  Mishael,  and  Azariah.'  If  however  they  shall  fall  reitx  to  their  leaving  the 
faith,  like  supra  14,  of  the  disciples  of  Jesus,  this  will  be  worse  than  their  death,  for 
they  will  say  '  had  our  religion  been  true,  our  teachers  would  not  have  departed  from 
it,  but  would  have  remained  in  it,  even  as  Hananiah,  Mishael,  and  Azariah  abode.' 
Therein  shall  be  the  test :  since  he  that  will  stand,  shall  stand,  and  not  be  affected  by 
what  happens  to  the  teachers  ;  whereas  he  whose  faith  is  not  good  will  depart  from  the 
religion.  Hence  he  says  to  refine  and  purify,  which  words  we  shall  explain 
on  xii.  10.  Then  he  states  that  this  will  happen  to  them  and  to  the  teachers  when 
some  time  still  remains  before  the  end. 

36-39.  Shall  do  according  to  his  will :  possibly  he  refers  to  the  empire  generally, 
from  the  establishment  of  the  state  of  Ishmael  to  the  end  of  their  history,  in  his 
account  of  the  ten  things  beginning  with  shall  do  and  ending  with  divide  for  a 
price.  Or  he  may  refer  to  the  chief  of  these  '  arms '  who  shall  waste  the  sanctuary, 
and  stop  the  Hagg.  Both  views  are  possible.  Now  we  have  already  heard  what  he 
will  do  with  Edom,  Israel,  and  the  sanctuary ;  so  he  now  goes  back  to  tell  us  the 
general  principles  of  his  conduct. 

(i)  He  shall  do  according  to  his  will :  compare  what  we  said  about  the 
*  ram '  and  the  '  he-goat ; '  it  means  that  his  commands  are  carried  out,  that  he  does 
what  he  pleases,  that  no  one  opposes  his  will,  or  makes  head  against  him,  owing  to 
the  might  of  his  state ;  and  that  he  attains  what  he  desires. 

(2)  And  he  shall  exalt  himself  and  magniJfy  himself  above  every  god : 
observe  that  in  this  chapter  six  gods  are  mentioned  : 

a.  He  shall  magnify  himself  above  every  GOD. 

b.  Shall  speak  marvellous  things  against  the  GOD  OF  GODS. 

c.  Neither  shall  he  regard  the  GOD  of  his  fathers. 

d.  Nor  regard  any  GOD. 

e.  He  shall  honour  the  GOD  of  fortresses. 

f.  A  GOD  whom  his  fathers  knew  not. 

None  of  these  except  b  refers  to  the  Creator  (cp.  Deut.  x.  17).  The  rest  refer  to 
deities  other  than  Him.  Of  three  of  these  it  is  said  that  he  will  not  regard  them,  but 
magnify  himself  against  them ;  but  two  of  them  will  be  honoured  by  him  {e  and  f). 
We  are  not  told  whether  he  will  or  will  not  serve  the  Creator,  but  merely  that  he  shall 
speak  marvellous  things,  cp.  vii.  25.    Why  does  he  say  of  X^ca^  god  of  fortresses  that  he 


70  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [XI.  37. 

will  honour  him,  not  serve  him,  and  of  all  besides  the  Creator  and  e  and y" that  he  will 
not  regard  them  ?  Most  probably  it  means  that  he  will  profess  to  serve  the  Almighty 
Creator,  but  will  say  of  him  what  is  impossible.  If  it  refer  to  the  kingdom  (i.e.  the 
Caliphate)  since  its  rise,  the  fact  is  shewn  in  their  language  and  the  popular  belief ; 
but  if  it  refer  to  this  last,  then  it  is  again  a  statement  about  the  system  which  he  will 
promulgate.  Of  the  other  deities  he  says  he  shall  magnify-  himself  above  all ; 
which  does  not  mean  that  he  shall  magnify  himself  against  the  idols  themselves,  but 
against  their  worshippers  ;  for  he  will  revile  their  creeds. 

Neither  shall  he  regard  the  god  of  his  fathers  refers  to  the  creeds  of  his 
fathers  who  served  idols,  if  Pasul  (Muhammad)  be  meant ;  if  the  last  be  signified,  it  will 
mean  that  he  will  annul  their  present  system,  and  in  consequence  ravage  the  house. 

Nor  the  desire  of  women :  Jerusalem,  which  the  peoples  and  nations  used  to 
glorify.  He  arranged  that  it  should  no  longer  be  the  Qiblah,  turning  his  back  to  it, 
and  his  face  to  the  place  whither  they  went  on  pilgrimage.  If  it  refer  to  the  last 
king,  it  will  refer  to  the  house  whither  the  pilgrims  went,  which  he  will  destroy. 
Very  likely,  however,  the  words  the  desire  of  women  refer  to  a  male  image  kept  in 
their  Qiblah ;  hence  the  words  come  between  the  god  of  his  fathers  and  any  god, 
indicating  that  it  refers  to  a  special  idol. 

Begard  signifies  turn  toj  observe  this,  because  the  word  occurs  three  times  in  this 
passage  (once  in  ver.  30,  twice  in  this  verse),  and  the  meaning  in  all  three  is  the  same. 

The  god  of  fortresses  :  either  the  name  of  a  particular  idol,  Alat  or  El-Uzza  as 
some  have  thought — both  are  familiar — or  some  other ;  or  the  word  Mauzzim  may 
refer  to  a  particular  people  of  that  name,  mentioned  again  in  ver.  39.  They  then  will 
have  a  god  and  a  religion  which  he  will  think  fit  to  reverence  and  not  to  overthrow. 
This  god  he  will  honour  merely ;  the  other  he  will  honoiir  with  gold  and 
silver,  etc. 

And  with  pleasant  things  :  i.e.  handsome  vessels  (Ezra  viii.  27). 

And  he  shall  deal  with  etc.  may  mean  one  of  two  things  :  (i)  he  shall  war 
with  them  because  they  will  not  obey  him ;  and  those  that  submit  to  him  and  adopt 
his  tenets  will  receive  from  him  honour  and  gifts  and  promotion  (whosoever  acknow- 
ledgeth  him,  etc.) ;  or  (2)  the  last  clause  explains  how  he  shall  deal  with  them,  viz. 
whosoever  acknowledgeth  he  will  increase  with  glory.  Apparently,  then,  these 
Mdtizzim  have  two  creeds  or  two  idols ;  one  of  which  he  shall  uphold  (ver.  38  a),  but 
not  the  other  (with  a  strange  god).  There  will  be  a  variety  then  in  their  creeds ; 
and  this  king  will  approve  of  one  idol  to  be  worshipped,  but  not  the  other.  We  are  told 
of  three  things  that  he  will  do  with  those  who  agree  to  his  tenets  : 

a.  He  will  increase  their  glory:  referring  to  the  wealth  and  office  that  he 
will  bring  them. 

b.  He  shall  cause  them  to  rule  over  many. 

c.  He  will  give  them  lands;  he  shall  divide  land  for  a  price,  i.e.  lands  of 
high  value ;  or  it  may  mean  that  he  will  make  this  serve  for  a  price,  the  price  for 
discarding  their  faith  and  adopting  his.     And  it  is  this  which  will  ruin  them  '  that 


XI.  40.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  71 

forsake  the  holy  covenant ; '  when  they  see  that  all  who  adopt  his  faith  are  elevated  to 
these  stations,  whereas  those  who  will  not  assent  to  his  tenets  are  slain  or  burnt. 
They  will  therefore  abandon  their  religion ;  and  thereby  great  multitudes  of  our  people 
have  been  ruinjed,  from  the  foundation  of  this  empire  till  now ;  many,  too,  in  the  West 
have  apostatised.  As  for  Israel,  when  God  shewed  His  wonders  in  Egypt  and  Sinai, 
the  people  (*  the  mixed  multitude ')  believed  in  their  religion  for  fear  of  the  sword,  but 
not  in  hope  of  promotion ;  and  what  God  has  enjoined  on  us  in  our  Law  is  that  if 
any  one  become  a  proselyte  we  are  to  feed  him  with  our  food  as  we  feed  the  orphans 
or  widows  (Deut.  xxiv.  19),  but  by  no  means  to  confer  upon  him  eminent  rank. 

And  he  shall  prosper  (ver.  36)  shews  that  he  will  succeed  in  all  his  doings, 
until  the  wrath  of  God  against  his  people  be  ended ;  and  after  the  reign  of  this  dynasty 
there  shall  be  no  other  ;  it  is  the  last  of  the  dynasties  which  shall  oppress  Israel. 

40.  And  at  the  time  of  the  end  :  this  expression  includes  two  things  :  (i)  the 
end  oit\i&  success  of  this  dynasty  ;  (2)  the  ^;^^  of  the  indignation  against  Israel. 

In  the  end  then  the  tables  will  be  turned ;  at  the  first  appearance  of  the  '  Little 
Horn '  it  warred  with  the  king  of  the  south  and  took  from  him  three  thrones,  as  we 
explained  at  vii.  24,  viz.  Syria  and  the  capitals,  and  then  took  from  the  king  of  the  north 
'Iraq  and  Khorasan  ;  and  went  on  conquering  and  taking  city  after  city  (cp.  ver.  24) 
up  to  the  Caspian  Gates.  But  when  his  success  shall  have  come  to  an  end,  these  two 
kings — of  the  north  and  of  the  south — shall  turn  against  him  (here  a  and  b).  Some 
portion  of  the  operations  of  the  king  of  the  south  has  been  realised  in  our  time : 
I  refer  to  certain  battles  wherein  he  has  taken  from  the  Moslems  Antioch,  Tarsus, 
'Ayn  Zarbah  and  that  region ;  but  more  events  are  still  to  come.  The  king  of  the 
north  however  has  not  as  yet  done  anything.  He  says  of  the  king  of  the  south  that 
he  shall  push  at  him,  because  he  is  near  him,  and  shall  come  from  near  Syria  ;  of  the 
king  of  the  north  that  he  shall  whirl  against  him,  because  he  shall  come  from  near 
the  Caspian  Gates. 

We  promised  that  when  we  came  to  this  verse  we  would  explain  the  import  of  the 
phrases  *  king  of  the  north,'  '  king  of  the  south.'  Many  scholars  suppose  the  king 
of  the  north  to  refer  to  the  king  0/ Arabia,  because  the  latter  took  from  the  king  of 
the  north  Baghdad,  which  had  been  the  royal  city  of  the  Magus.  We  shall  shew 
how  this  difficulty  can  be  solved. 

You  must  know  that  the  four  kingdoms  mentioned  in  the  dreams  of  Nebuchad- 
nezzar and  Daniel  are  divided  as  follows.  The  first  is  a  world-empire j  now  the  rulers 
of  the  whole  world  are  not  named  after  any  particular  quarter,  but  after  their  chief 
city,  e.g.  'king  of  Babylon;'  not  'king  of  the  east,  west,'  etc.;  no  such  phrase  can 
be  found  used  of  the  king  of  the  Chaldees,  nor  of  the  kings  of  the  Medes  and  Persians, 
nor  of  Alexander,  the  first  king  of  the  Greeks.  Only  after  his  death,  when  his  king- 
dom was  divided  among  his  four  scholars  (xi.  4),  does  he  begin  to  speak  of  a  '  king  of 
the  north '  or  '  of  the  south,'  Now  if  the  empire  of  Islam  were  in  any  one  of  the 
quarters — north  or  south — he  might  very  well  use  of  it  the  terms  '  king  of  the  north ' 
or  *  of  the  south.'     As  however  that  empire  has  seized  countries  in  all  four  quarters, 


72  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [XI.  40. 

it  cannot  be  named  after  any  one  of  them.  This  principle  is  obviously  correct.  The 
king  of  Islam  then  can  be  neither.  Hence  he  says  the  king  of  the  south  shall  ^«j^ 
at  him,  sc.  at  the  king  mentioned  in  ver.  36.  If  the  king  of  the  south  pushes  at  him, 
he  cannot  be  the  king  of  the  south.  Similarly  he  says  with  reference.to  him  that  the 
king  of  the  north  shall  whirl  against  him,  i.e.  come  against  him  like  a  whirlwind; 
it  is  clear  then  that  the  king  of  Islam  cannot  be  king  of  the  north. 

With  chariots  and  with  horsemen  and  with  many  ships:  he  does  not 
specify  which  of  the  two  shall  come  with  them  ;  probably  the  king  of  the  north  will 
come  to  him  with  chariots  and  horsemen,  while  the  king  of  the  south  does  so  on  the 
sea  with  ships  j  cp.  Num.  xxiv.  24. 

Observe  he  shall  come,  not  theyj  which  would  have  referred  to  both  kings  together, 
so  that  we  should  have  supposed  the  two  would  assist  each  other  against  him.  Now 
we  should  not  know  which  will  come  from  the  words  of  Daniel ;  but  this  has  been 
explained  by  another  prophet,  Joel  son  of  Pethuel.  He  has  written  three  chapters 
(commencing  respectively  at  i.  2,  ii.  i,  and  iii.  9) ;  the  first  of  which  refers  to  Nebu- 
chadnezzar, the  second  to  the  king  of  the  north  mentioned  here  (ii.  20  /  will  remove 
far  off  from  you  the  northern;  we  shall  presently  explain  how  this  shall  be),  the 
third  to  Gog. 

The  Islamitic  prince  established  at  Baghdad — not  the  Abbaside — is  from  the 
north  ;  now  they  were  originally  unbelievers,  but  will  be  associated  with  the  Abbaside 
Caliph  ;  and  the  chief  of  these  arms  will  certainly  take  that  city,  sc.  Baghdad,  and 
they  will  be  repulsed  before  him,  and  perhaps  he  will  kill  some  of  them ;  after  which 
they  shall  rise  up  against  those  before  whom  they  were  repulsed,  and  make  for  Babylon, 
as  the  prophets  foretold.  See  Isaiah  xiii.  i,  Jeremiah  Ii.  They  say  of  them  they 
shall  not  regard  silver  or  gold,  inasmuch  as  they  will  only  desire  to  take  vengeance  for 
their  sufferings  at  the  hands  of  those  who  took  their  city,  and  shall  gather  together 
and  come  against  them.  They  are  referred  to  here  in  the  words  and  the  king  of 
the  north  shall  sweep  against  him.;  and  the  words  he  shall  enter  into  the  countries, 
and  shall  overflow  and  pass  through  indicate  that  he  shall  enter  the  realm  of  the 
king  who  took  Baghdad  from  the  hands  of  the  Abbasides,  and  shall  conquer  the  land 
of  Babylon  with  the  sword  ;  at  his  arrival  a  number  of  Israelites  shall  go  out,  directing 
their  steps  to  the  land  of  Israel ;  cp.  Jer.  1.  5.  Then  the  king  of  the  north  shall 
direct  his  steps  towards  the  territory  of  this  king,  and  shall  go  out  from  Babylon  to 
Syria,  conquering  every  city  he  passes  with  the  sword,  it  not  being  his  primary  inten- 
tion to  have  a  royal  throne  established  for  him,  but  only  to  destroy  the  cities  that  are 
under  the  sway  of  the  lord  of  Islam.  He  will  kill  all  whom  he  meets  (he  shall  stretch 
forth  his  hand  also  upon  the  countries) ;  and  he  is  to  come  to  the  land  of  Israel 
(he  shall  enter  also  into  the  glorious  land). 

Shall  be  overthrown:  i.e.  most  of  the  cities  and  villages  in  the  land  of  Israel, 
and  all  the  sea-coast. 

But  these  shall  be  delivered  out  of  his  hand:  Edom,  i.e.  Djebel-eshshara, 
Moab,  and  a  portion  of  the  children  of  Ammon.    We  are  not  told  the  reason  of 


XII.  I.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  73 

this ;  he  cannot  pass  them  over  through  weakness,  since  these  countries  are  not  more 
powerful  than  Babylon  and  Egypt ;  rather  he  does  not  trouble  himself  about  them, 
seeing  that  they  have  no  state  nor  royalty  nor  wealth ;  he  will  not  therefore  regard 
them ;  many  Israelites  however  will  pass  over  thither  (cp.  Is.  xvi.  4) ;  and  some 
have  thought  that  they  will  pass  over  thither  before  this  king ;  the  Scripture  more- 
over (Joel  /.  ^.)  shews  that  Israel  will  be  in  Zion  at  the  time.  Next  he  will  pass  over 
into  the  land  of  Egjrpt,  that  too  being  Islamitic  territory  ;  and  this  is  the  only 
country  which  is  said  to  be  plundered,  owing  to  the  treasures  and  riches  which  it 
contains  (ver.  43). 

The  Libyans  and  Ethiopians  shall  be  at  his  steps :  he  will  be  followed  at 
the  time  by  certain  Ethiopians  and  Libyans  ;  or,  perhaps,  on  his  sojourn  in  Egypt  he 
shall  destroy  the  Ethiopians  and  Libyans,  who  are  in  Egyptian  territory. 

44.  But  tidings  shall  trouble  him :  when  he  comes  to  the  western  frontier  of 
the  province  of  Egypt,  there  shall  reach  him  tidings  from  the  east  and  the  north,  sc.  of 
the  entrance  of  Israel  from  the  wilderness  into  Palestine,  as  we  shall  explain  at  length 
afterwards  ;  and  when  they  enter  it  from  the  wilderness  they  will  conquer  it  with  the 
sword,  and  their  enemies  shall  be  repulsed  before  them.  When  this  reaches  the  king 
of  the  north,  who  will  at  the  time  be  at  the  extremity  of  Egypt,  he  will  return  to  Syria 
to  destroy  and  utterly  make  away  with  many,  i.e.  Israel,  who  entered  in  large 
numbers.  But  when  the  news  of  his  return  reaches  Israel,  they  will  gather  together 
on  Mount  Zion,  and  do  what  Joel  says  (chap.  ii.  i  and  foil.).  This  they  will  do  at  the 
time  when  he  plants  the  tents  of  his  palace ;  it  is  thought  that  he  will  pitch  his 
tents  at  'Amwas ;  now  between  that  place  and  Jerusalem  are  four  parasangs ;  or  else 
that  he  will  encamp  in  the  wilderness  of  Tekoa,  which  also  is  a  vast  plain.  And 
when  he  spreads  out  his  tents  there,  intending  to  come  to  them  the  next  morning  in 
Jerusalem,  God  will  send  His  angel  Michael,  who  shall  destroy  his  entire  army  ;  they 
shall  all  die,  and  remain  cast  about  and  putrefying  on  the  face  of  the  plain  till  they 
decompose  and  stink  {v.  Joel  /.  r.).  Thence  we  know  that  this  section  deals  with  the 
king  of  the  north,  and  relates  what  will  happen  to  Israel  at  his  coming. 


XIL 

1.  And  at  that  time  refers  to  xi.  40  ;  and  signifies  the  times  specified  in  vii.  25. 

Shall  stand  (instead  of  *  shall  come '  or  some  similar  word)  shews  that  the  standing 
shall  last  three  years  and  a  half;  and  he  shall  stand  for  two  purposes  :  (l)  to  put  an 
end  to  the  monarchies  (•z'.  x.  21) ;  (2)  to  deliver  Israel  from  certain  calamities  that  are 
to  befall  them.  Before  Michael  was  called  *  your  prince ; '  here  the  great  prince, 
shewing  that  he  is  a  mighty  angel. 

And  there  shall  be  a  time  of  trouble,  such  as  never  was  since  shews  that 
there  can  have  been  nothing  like  it  since  the  confusion  of  tongues  ;  not  that  there  has 
been  nothing  of  the  same  kind;  since  there  never  have  been  wanting  famine,  sword, 
plague,  sickness,  poverty,  and  the  other  things  found  in  the  world,  nor  religious  per- 

1  [11.3.] 


74  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [XII.  i. 

secution  either  (we  have  seen  Nebuchadnezzar  require  Hananiah  etc.  to  worship  the 
image  he  had  made) ;  it  can  only  refer  to  a  state  like  that  which  Oded  the  prophet 
described  to  king  Asa,  when  *  there  was  no  peace  to  him  that  went  out,'  etc.  (2  Chr. 
XV.  8  ;  cp.  Zech.  viii.  10).  The  chief  source  of  these  afflictions  is  that  the  *  Arms'  will 
seek  to  take  the  kingdom  of  the  Abbasides,  coming  from  Babylon,  as  the  learned  tell 
us ;  and  also  that  they  will  prevent  the  pilgrims  from  praying  in  Mecca,  where  they 
used  to  pray,  and  will  destroy  the  remembrance  of  the  Man  of  Wind ;  then  the 
sword  will  come  between  them,  and  the  'Arms'  will  prevail  against  them,  and  will 
make  mighty  havoc  among  them  ;  some  of  them  will  flee  into  the  'forest  in  Arabia' 
(Is.  xxi.  13),  hungry  and  thirsty  ;  '  for  they  fled  away  from  the  swords.'  The  reason  of 
their  turning  into  that  region  is  that  they  know  it  is  impossible  for  them  to  return  to 
their  own  cities  because  the  Conspirator  has  already  taken  possession  of  them  ;  they 
will  take  counsel  therefore  to  flee  to  their  kinsmen,  who  assent  to  their  opinions,  and 
to  stay  with  them  ;  these  will  come  to  meet  them  with  food  and  water,  that  their  souls 
may  live.  From  that  time  civil  war  shall  commence  in  Ishmael.  The  Conspirators 
however  shall  not  get  the  empire,  because  their  chief  will  require  men  to  abandon  their 
religion,  a  religion  about  four  hundred  years  old,  and  indeed  without  any  miracle,  save 
the  sword ;  the  sword  therefore  shall  fall  among  them,  and  at  that  time  the  sultan's 
courts  shall  cease,  there  shall  be  no  longer  a  royal  throne,  nor  business  on  the  roads, 
nor  police  and  guardians  in  the  cities,  no  shops  open,  no  merchants  travelling,  no  rain 
falling  from  the  sky,  no  husbandman  or  vine-dresser,  no  man  with  any  possible  means 
of  subsistence.  Then  shall  be  the  great  famine  and  the  great  plague,  with  the  sword ; 
and  then  shall  be  accomplished  the  '  destruction  and  that  decreed  ; '  only  a  few  men 
will  be  left,  the  cities  shall  be  wasted  and  the  roads  desolate,  the  nation  occupied  with 
each  other;  then  shall  Israel  flee  out  from  among  them  to  the  'wilderness  of  the 
nations.'  To  this  condition  do  the  words  of  the  text  allude.  The  king  of  the  north 
shall  come  to  Babylon,  and  the  Israelites  come  out  from  Babylon  into  their  own  land 
before  the  great  confusion.  At  that  time  there  shall  be  an  arousing  in  the  land  of 
Israel  (?)  before  they  depart  (cp.  Jer.  li.  55). 

Thy  people  shall  escape  :  since  the  destruction  will  alight  upon  the  Gentiles,  as 
was  said  before  ;  but  from  the  addition  every  one  that  shall  be  fotmd.  written 
in  the  book  we  see  that  not  every  Jew  shall  escape,  but  those  that  are  written,  and 
those  only;  not  the  wicked  among  Israel  who  did  not  'repent  at  that  time'  (2  Chr. 
ii.  16  and  Deut.  iv.  30) ;  those  who  repent  shall  survive  ;  but  those  who  do  not  repent 
shall  perish  by  the  sword  by  the  hand  of  the  enemy,  or  by  the  plague  of  God 
(Amos  ix.  10). 

Observe  that  Is.  Ixv.  10  uses  the  same  phrase  {written)  of  the  works  of  the  wicked, 
that  is  used  of  those  of  the  righteous  by  Malachi  iii,  16.  Plainly  the  phrase  here 
cannot  refer  to  both  good  and  bad,  but  must  be  interpreted  as  above.  This  is  ex- 
plained by  Isaiah  iv.  3,  'Every  one  that  is  written  unto  life  in  Jerusalem;'  shewing 
that  only  those  of  them  shall  escape  who  are  written  unto  life;  adding  afterwards, 
when  God  shall  have  washed  away  the  filth  of  the  daughters  of  Zion,  indicating  that 


XII.  2.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  75 

the  persons  written  unto  life  are  those  that  are  washed  clean  of  filth  and  blood.  [Of 
the  others],  those  that  are  among  the  Gentiles  shall  fall  by  the  sword  ;  those  that  do 
not  perish  by  their  hand,  but  go  out  with  the  people  to  the  *  wilderness  of  the  peoples,' 
shall  be  slain  by  God  Almighty  (Ezek.  xx.  38).  I  cannot  possibly  give  a  full  account 
of  what  will  happen  at  that  time,  since  that  would  require  a  book  for  itself;  I  have 
suggested  in  every  book  of  the  three  portions  of  Scripture  that  I  have  explained  as 
much  as  each  passage  allowed. 

2.  At  that  time  many  of  the  dead  shall  rise.  Many,  as  in  Est.  viii.  17;  not  a// the 
dead  shall  rise,  but  only  some;  we  have  explained  this  on  Ezek.  xxxvii.  at  length,  and 
have  said  a  little  about  it  on  Job  xiv.  12;  here  let  us  add  a  little  more.  Let  us  observe, 
first,  that  he  promises  the  deliverance  of  the  nation  (ver.  i)  ;  and  then  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  dead  ;  indicating  that  the  living  and  the  dead  both  shall  see  the  salvation. 
Now  just  as  he  divided  the  living  into  two  portions,  one  to  survive  and  one  to  perish, 
so  he  divides  those  that  are  to  rise  from  the  dead  into  two  portions,  one  to  everlasting 
life,  and  the  other  to  contempt.  Ezekiel  has  shewn  that  those  who  are  to  rise  are 
people  of  the  Captivity  (xxxvii.  11), '  Behold,  they  say.  Our  bones  are  dried  up,  and  our 
hope  is  lost,'  which  is  not  the  condition  of  those  who  died  under  the  monarchy. 
Similarly,  Isaiah  says  (xxvi.  19),  '  Thy  dead  shall  live,  awake  and  sing,  ye  that  dwell 
in  the  dust,'  which  is  to  be  compared  with  the  phrase  here,  them  that  sleep  in  dust 
of  the  ground ;  only  there  the  prophet  confined  himself  to  the  mention  of  the  saints 
of  the  nation,  whereas  here  he  speaks  of  both  classes  together. 

Shame  and  everlasting  contempt :  see  Isaiah  ad  fin. :  '  They  shall  look  on  the 
carcases  of  the  men  who  sinned  against  the  Lord  ; '  a  description  of  those  who  died 
during  the  Captivity,  having  offended  God  by  capital  transgressions. 

To  shame  and  eternal  contempt :  shame,  because  they  used  to  cast  reproaches 
on  the  best  of  the  nation,  who  sighed,  and  were  troubled  and  vexed  at  what  had 
befallen  the  nation  and  the  house  of  God  (cp.  Ps.  Ixix.  throughout),  and  would  eat 
and  drink  and  let  their  time  pass  in  amusement  and  enjoyment,  which  God  has 
forbidden  us  (Hos.  ix.  l) ;  nor  was  it  sufficient  for  them  that  they  did  not  do  what 
God  enjoined,  but  they  must  abhor  those  who  obeyed  Him,  and  reproach  them 
for  practising  the  Law,  mourning  and  fasting  ;  hence,  at  the  end  of  the  Psalm  quoted 
(ver.  22),  he  curses  them  ('  Let  their  table  before  them  become  a  snare,'  etc.).  Now 
when  the  Mount  of  Olives  splits,  and  a  vast  gorge  is  formed  between  the  halves,  this 
gorge  will  become  the  place  of  punishment  of  these  wicked  ones  ;  and  whenever  there 
is  a  sabbath-day  or  a  new  moon,  Israel  will  go  out  on  the  first  day  of  the  week  or  on 
the  second  day  of  the  month  to  these  prisoners,  and  see  what  has  befallen  them  ;  cp. 
Is.  Ixv.  15.  These  evil-doers  used  to  reproach  the  saints  wrongfully;  they  shall 
reproach  the  evil-doers  justly. 

Contempt :  when  they  hear  their  bitter  cry,  because  of  the  pain  of  the  fire  and 
the  bite  of  the  serpents,  for  their  worm  shall  never  die;  and  eternal,  because  there  is 
no  end  to  it.  Wherever  the  word  eternal  occurs  there  is  no  proof,  intellectual  or  tradi- 
tional, that  there  is  an  end  ;   on  the  contrary,  reason  makes  it  necessary  that  the 

1  2 


-jd  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [XII.  3. 

punishment  of  the  wicked  shall  be  everlasting,  without  term.  We  must  now  observe 
that  whenever  the  text  has  an  intelligible  expression  with  a  possible  literal  meaning,  it 
is  not  allowable  to  explain  it  away  by  abandoning  that  literal  sense ;  it  is  necessary 
therefore  that  the  words  those  that  sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth  must  be  taken 
literally,  and  must  not  be  referred  to  the  people  of  the  Captivity,  who,  during  that 
captivity,  might  be  compared  to  the  dead  ;  especially  as  there  is  nothing  in  this 
chapter  but  what  is  to  be  taken  literally.  We  are  familiar  with  the  fact  that  when 
there  was  the  Vision,  which  Daniel  saw,  Gabriel  interpreted  it  to  him  because  it  had 
an  allegorical  meaning  ;  but  when  he  came  to  the  words  *  two  thousand  three 
hundred,'  etc.,  he  said  '  the  vision  is  true,'  meaning  what  we  have  there  stated ; 
similarly,  at  the  beginning  of  this  section,  he  said,  *  I  will  tell  thee  the  truth  ; '  conse- 
quently the  whole  of  this  section  is  to  be  taken  literally,  so  that  this  verse  must 
be  taken  literally ;  nor  is  this  refuted  either  by  reason  or  tradition,  as  we  have 
shewn.  It  stands  besides  in  our  records  that  God  raised  to  life  the  child  of 
the  Shunammite,  and  likewise  the  dead  man  who  touched  the  bones  of  Elisha ;  since, 
therefore,  such  a  thing  has  happened  and  is  no  impossibility,  that  resurrection  of  the 
dead  of  Israel,  which  God  has  promised,  shall  be  accomplished  too.  And  since  he 
says  these  to  shame  and  eternal  contempt,  the  state  of  the  rewarded  and  of  the 
punished  alike  shall  be  everlasting.  God  will  raise  the  dead  of  the  Captivity  at  the 
time  of  the  Deliverance  ;  the  dead  of  the  monarchy,  on  the  other  hand,  when  all  the 
dead  rise,  to  be  rewarded  or  punished,  which  shall  be  at  the  creation  of  the  new 
heavens  and  the  new  earth.  Doubtless  some  great  change  will  take  place  in  this 
heaven  and  earth  (see  Is.  xl.  26).  Job  refers  to  the  same  (xiv.  12)  :  'Till  there  be  no 
more  heaven  they  shall  not  wake.'  It  is  well  known  among  all  mankind  that  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead  will  take  place  when  this  takes  place  in  the  heaven  and  the 
earth  (Job  /.  ^.) ;  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  of  Israel,  however,  shall  take  place 
before  that.  This  is  a  mere  fragment  that  we  have  given  here  ;  it  was  impossible  for 
us  to  pass  the  passage  without  saying  something  about  it. 

3.  He  divides  the  living  and  the  dead  each  into  two  companies,  as  we  saw  above. 
After  that  he  says  the  wise,  separating  them  from  the  multitude,  to  shew  that  their 
rank  is  higher  than  that  of  the  rest  of  the  nation.  This  all  refers  to  those  who  will  rise 
from  the  grave.  The  brightness  of  their  faces,  he  says,  will  be  like  the  colour  of  the 
firmament— marvellously  bright,  like  the  face  of  Moses.  It  is  a  light  wherewith  God 
will  cover  them,  to  shew  their  nobility,  while  at  the  same  time  they  take  pleasure  in  it. 

They  that  turn  the  many  to  righteousness  :  those  that  turned  mankind  from 
error  to  religion.  The  many  :  so  of  the  priests  (Mai.  ii.  6),  'And  turned  away  many 
from  iniquity.'  They  directed  men  to  religion  by  teaching  them  the  Commandments 
of  Jehovah  ;  and  at  the  same  time  turned  them  from  transgression  by  busying  them- 
selves with  the  Law  of  Jehovah,  and  praying  God  to  direct  them  to  the  knowledge  of 
His  statutes.  They  are  those  whose  way  is  perfect :  their  prayer  is  recorded  and  their 
words  expressed  in  the  twenty-two  eight-lined  stanzas;  they  are  those  who  say  to  him 
that  seeks  instruction,  Ho^  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters.    In  Isaiah  lii. 


XII.  4.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  77 

we  are  told  that  by  his  knowledge  shall  my  righteous  servant  justify  many j  in  that 
chapter  the  groaning  of  the  ivise^  and  his  griefs,  and  his  great  knowledge  and  piety 
are  recorded.  These  then  are  referred  to  in  the  words  the  wise  shall  shine  as  the 
brightness  of  the  firmament,  etc. 

Like  the  stars  conveys  two  ideas  :  (i)  Hght ;  (2)  perpetuity  and  eternity ;  it  shall 
not  be  cut  off  for  ever.  This  shall  God  do  with  them  after  he  has  shewn  them  the 
salvation  of  Israel,  and  the  rebuilding  of  Jerusalem.  They  shall  abide  a  while  till 
they  have  seen  the  sight  thereof,  and  then  God  will  remove  them  to  the  place  of 
reward.  Maybe  they  will  be  with  the  angels  above  (cp.  Zech.  iii.  7),  in  return  for 
their  teaching  Israel  the  Law,  and  turning  them  from  their  sins,  and  lamenting  during 
the  Captivity,  and  forcing  themselves  to  grieve.  Others  than  they  engaged  Israel  in 
the  study  of  traditions,  and  took  their  goods,  and  fattened  their  bodies  with  food 
and  drink,  and  died  merry,  not  doing  their  duty,  but  causing  men  to  sin  ;  teaching 
them  what  would  make  God  angry  with  them  :  unquestionably  therefore  their  punish- 
ment will  be  far  severer  than  that  of  their  followers. 

4.  Hitherto  the  angel  has  been  explaining  what  is  to  happen  from  the  time  at 
which  he  is  speaking  till  the  end  of  the  world,  as  he  said  at  the  beginning  of 
his  discourse,  I  have  come  to  tell  thee  what  shall  be  till  the  end  of  time. 

And  thou  Daniel  close  these  words  :  i,  e.  leave  them  as  they  are.  Do  not  ask 
for  more  to  be  revealed  than  has  been  told  thee. 

And  seal  the  book :  *  seal  this  book  of  thine  at  what  has  been  told  thee,  and 
expect  no  more.'  Nothing  else  could  be  revealed  to  him  about  the  matter.  Therefore 
he  said  this,  shewing  him  that  there  was  nothing  left  to  be  told  him. 

To  the  time  of  the  end :  shewing  that  it  should  not  be  revealed  to  any  one  till 
the  end  of  the  Captivity  ;  any  one  who  professes  to  know  the  end  of  the  Captivity  is 
a  deceiver. 

Many  shall  run  to  and  fro  :  i.  e.  the  wise  and  the  seekers  of  knowledge.  This 
running  to  and  fro  may  be  of  two  kinds :  (i)  They  shall  run  over  the  countries  in 
search  of  knowledge,  because  scholars  will  be  found  in  every  region ;  the  seekers  of 
knowledge,  therefore,  will  go  to  and  fro  to  learn  from  them ;  this  is  expressed  by 
Amos  (viii.  12).  This  shall  be  at  the  beginning  of  their  career;  when  they  seek 
so  ardently,  God  will  make  revelations  to  them.  (2)  They  shall  run  to  and  fro  in 
God's  Word  like  those  who  seek  treasures,  and  thereafter  knowledge  shall  increase ; 
knowledge  of  two  things  :  (a)  the  commandments  j  (V)  the  end.  God  will  not  reveal 
the  end  until  they  know  the  commandments.  They  are  the  men  that  fear  the  Lord, 
who  are  in  possession  of  His  secrets,  which  cannot  be  had  save  by  study  and  search 
and  inquiry  into  the  Word  of  God :  compare  the  prayers  teach  me,  O  Lord,  the  way 
of  Thy  statutes;  open  my  eyes.  These  and  similar  expressions  shew  the  vanity  of  the 
profession  of  the  traditionalists  like  El-FayyumT,  who  have  destroyed  Israel  by  their 
writings ;  who  maintain  that  the  Commandments  of  God  cannot  be  known  by  study, 
because  it  leads  to  contradictions  ;  so  that  we  must  follow  the  tradition  of  the  suc- 
cessors of  the  prophets,  viz.  the  authors  of  the  Mishnah  and  Talmud,  all  whose 


78  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [XII.  5. 

sayings  are  from  God.  So  he  has  led  men  astray  by  his  lying  books,  and  vouches  for 
the  veracity  of  any  one  who  hes  against  God.  He  shall  be  punished  therefore  more 
severely  than  they,  and  God  shall  take  vengeance  for  his  people  from  him  and  them 
that  are  like  him. 

5  .  After  Daniel  had  heard  all  that  was  said  to  him,  without  any  other  angel  being 
with  the  one  who  had  been  addressing  him, — when  the  angel  had  finished  his  speech, 
he  saw  two  other  angels,  one  with  him  in  the  region  where  he  was  standing,  and  the 
other  on  the  other  side. 

Other  two :   this  may  indicate  one  of  three  things  : 

(1)  That  he  knew  that  they  were  not  the  same  angels  whom  he  had  seen  in  the 
'Vision'  (viii.  13),  when  one  asked  the  other  concerning  that  of  which  Daniel  was 
thinking,  and  that  other  answered  him  ;  as  one  of  the  angels  here,  too,  asks  the  other 
how  long  etc.,  we  might  have  thought  they  were  the  same  ;  the  word  other  is  there- 
fore inserted  to  shew  that  this  is  not  so. 

(2)  The  word  other  may  be  intended  to  shew  us  that  the  author  does  not  refer  to 
the  two  angels  already  mentioned  jn  this  chapter  (xi.  16,  18),  but  to  two  others  ; 
in  which  case  he  will  at  this  time  have  seen  five  angels  ;  two  mentioned  above 
and  three  here. 

(3)  The  word  other  may  be  intended  to  prevent  our  thinking  them  the  great 
angel  with  another  ;  by  its  insertion  we  know  that  there  were  three  angels. 

6.  And  he  said  to  the  man :  i.  e.  one  of  the  angels  (not  the  plur.,  in  which  case 
we  might  have  thought  that  both  had  asked  him).  Which  of  the  two  we  do  not 
know ;  nor  does  he  tell  him  the  reason  of  his  seeing  the  one  who  neither 
asked  nor  answered.  Most  hkely  the  one  who  asked  was  standing  on  the  other 
side  ;  while  the  one  who  stood  with  him  was  intended  to  allay  his  fears,  or  to 
bring  Daniel  to  hear  the  question  and  the  answer.  Hitherto  we  did  not  know  that 
the  great  angel  was  standing ;  here  he  explains  that  he  was  standing  in  the  air 
above  the  water,  and  not  on  the  ground.  He  was  not  one  of  the  angels  who 
habitually  descend  from  heaven  to  earth,  having  been  sent  by  God  for  Daniel's 
sake  only. 

How  long  shall  it  be  to  the  end  of  these  wonders?  The  wonders  are 
these  tribulations,  which  shall  come  to  pass  at  the  last  time.  How  long  ?  what 
shall  be  their  duration  ? 

He  answered  just  as  Palmoni  answered  the  first  questioner  (viii.  13).  It  was 
not  the  questioner's  object  to  find  oi^it  himself:  for  the  angels  know  the  mystery 
which  is  closed  tip ;  he  only  asks  that  Daniel  may  hear  the  answer.  If  any  one 
ask  why  he  did  not  give  this  reply  without  a  question,  we  answer  that  possibly 
the  angel  would  not  have  given  it  unless  questioned,  seeing  that  the  matter  is 
one  of  the  great  mysteries. 

7.  Notice,  too,  that  he  does  not  answer  without  an  oath.  The  angel,  he  says, 
swore  an  oath,  to  shew  that  there  can  be  no  alteration ;  for  it  is  a  period  of 
great  length.    This  oath  was   not  for  DanieVs  sake,   but   for   Israel's,   the   Israel 


XII.  7.]  "  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  79 

that  shall  be  in  the  time  of  tribulation.  The  force  of  this  oath  is  marked  by  two 
things:  (l)  He  raised  both  hands:  now  an  oath  with  both  hands  raised  is  the  most 
forcible  kind  ;  op.  Gen.  xiv.  2,  and  *  I  have  raised  my  hand,'  said  by  the  Creator 
in  a  number  of  places.  (2)  He  swears  by  the  name  of  God ;  the  most  powerful  oath, 
there  is  none  more  powerful  (cp.  Jer.  xxiv.  26). 

By  him  that  liveth  for  ever :  the  Blessed  Creator  lives  eternally.  The 
Hebrew  word  Tl  means  (i)  living,  e.g.  Gen.  vi.  19;  (2)  as  a  substantive,  life, 
e.  g.  by  the  life  of  Pharaoh,  ibid.  xlii.  16.     Here  it  must  be  interpreted  as  (i). 

He  swore  that  it  shall  be  for  a  time,  times,  and  a  half;  exactly  the  same  as  the 
period  mentioned  in  vii.  25. 

Here  we  will  collect  the  passages  wherein  the  times  connected  with  the  end  are 
mentioned.    They  are  eight  in  all. 

(1)  Is.  xvi.  14.    Within  three  years,  as  the  years  0/ an  hireling,  and  the  glory  of 
Moab  shall  be  brought  into  contempt. 

(2)  Is.  xxi.  16,    Within  a  year,  according  to  the  years  of  an  hireling,  and  all  the 
glory  of  Kedar  shall  fall. 

(3)  Dan.  vii.  25.   And  they  shall  be  given  into  his  hand  until  a  time,  and  times, 
and  half  a  time. 

(4)  Dan.  viii.   14.      Unto  two  thousand  and  three   hundred  evenings    and 
mornings. 

(5)  Dan.  xi.  33.    They  shall  fall  by  the  sword  and  by  flame,  by  captivity  and  by 
spoil,  many  days. 

(6)  The  present  passage. 

(7)  Infra  li. 

(8)  Infra  12. 

Of  (i)  (three  years)  we  know  both  the  beginning  and  the  end.  It  begins  when 
'Moab  comes  to  his  sanctuary  to  pray,  and  is  not  able'  (ver.  12),  i.e.  when  the  pilgrims 
desire,  to  pray  according  to  their  wont,  but  are  prevented  by  the  Arms,  as  we  have 
explained  above  ;  it  ends  when  'the  glory  of  Moab  is  brought  into  contempt'  (ver.  14), 
i.  e.  when  they  become  feeble  and  few  in  number,  '  small  and  of  no  account '  (ibid), 
'with  no  ruler''  at  their  head  {ibid). 

(2)  Commences  when  '  those  that  would  pray '  flee  into  the  forest  in  Arabia 
(Is.  xxi.  13  ;  V.  supra),  and  ends  when  '  all  the  glory  of  Kedar  shall  fall ; '  when 
no  'glory'  shall  be  left  to  Kedar,  and  their  mighty  men  shall  be  few.  This  is 
one  of  the  above  three  years  ;  when  one  of  those  years  is  passed  their  glory  shall  fall ; 
at  the  end  of  the  three  it  shall  be  brought  into  contempt ;  i.  e.  no  glory  shall  be  left 
them  at  all. 

(3)  Means,  as  we  have  said,  either  that  the  time  which  he  shall  fake  about 
his  work  in  Ishmael  and  Israel  is  a  '  time,  times,  and  half  a  time; '  or  that  Israel  shall 
be  in  the  hands  of  this  Conspirator  till  that  period  be  left  till  the  end  ;  most  probably, 
in  my  opinion,  this  person,  who  is  said  to  be  about  to  put  a  stop  to  the  pilgrimage  and 


8o  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [XII.-. 

to  destroy  the  house,  and  to  overthrow  the  religion  of  Israel,  will  continue  to  do  so 
till  that  period  commences,  when  he  will  cease  and  perish,  *be  broken  without  hand;* 
so  that  it  does  not  refer  to  the  duration  of  his  power.  Rather,  when  his  reign  is 
over,  that  period  will  commence ;  and  when  that  period  commences,  the  tribulations 
will  commence  (v.  supra) ;  and  when  it  ends,  they  will  end.  This  may  be  seen  from 
the  expression  here,  it  shall  be  for  a  time,  times,  and  a  half;  and  when  they 
have  made  an  end  of  breaking  in  pieces  the  power  of  the  holy  people, 
all  these  things  shall  be  finished.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  tribulations  will 
begin  when  the  times  begin,  and  end  when  they  end. 

(4)  The  two  thousand  and  three  hundred  have  already  been  shewn  to  be  1350 
days  ;  the  author  says  they  end  when  holiness  shall  be  justified  j  their  beginning  is  not 
told  us.  Most  probably  the  tribulations  shall  remain  upon  Israel  from  the  time  of  the 
king  who  shall  destroy  Mecca  and  throw  the  religion  of  Israel  down  to  the  ground  for 
two  thousand  and  three  hundred  mornings  and  evenings  :  for  one  year  out  of  this 
they  shall  fiill  by  the  sword,  etc. ;  but  at  the  end  of  the  period  holiness  shall  be 
justified,  which  is  the  opposite  of  trtith  being  cast  on  the  ground.  This  may  mean 
either  that  Elias  will  appear,  or  that  Israel  shall  enter  their  land  from  'the  wilderness 
of  the  Gentiles.'  Probably,  part  of  the  2300  falls  in  the  time  of  the  Arms,  and  part  in 
the  *  time  and  times ; '  since  in  them  Israel  shall  depart  into  '  the  wilderness  of  the 
Gentiles '  {v.  supra).  It  is  clear,  therefore,  (l)  that  they  shall  fall  by  the  sword  before 
the  times  J  (2)  that  part  of  the  2300  falls  in  the  time  of  the  Arms  and  part  into  the 
general  sum  of  the  times.  Now  we  have  shewn  above  that  py  means  a  single  time, 
and  that  pjiy  refers  to  periods  more  than  one,  not  necessarily  two.  Most  probably 
this  period  is  the  same  as  that  mentioned  in  ver.  1 1,  ubi  vide. 

Breaking  in  pieces  the  power  of  the  holy  people  refers  to  the  tribulations 
which  fell  on  Israel  during  these  years.  Observe  that  there  is  a  time  when  tribulation 
shall  be  on  Israel  only,  and  a  time  when  tribulation  shall  be  on  the  whole  world.  See 
Jer.  XXX.  5,  where  we  have  heard  a  voice  refers  to  the  news  which  shall  reach  Israel, 
cp.  Is.  xxiv.  16  ;  and  fear  and  not  peace  refers  to  tribulations  which  shall  be  common 
to  the  whole  world  ;  cp.  Is.  /.  c.  17,  Jer.  I.e.  6,  'Wherefore  do  I  see  every  man  with 
hands  upon  his  loins,'  followed  by  (ver.  7),  '  it  is  even  the  time  of  Jacob's  trouble.' 
Which  last  may  indicate  one  of  two  things  :  either  what  will  happen  to  Israel  in  the 
time  of  the  Arms,  mentioned  above,  which  will  be  a  tirne  of  trouble,  or  what  will 
happen  to  them  after  they  have  entered  their  land  from  the  'wilderness  of  the  Gentiles ; ' 
in  which  case  it  will  refer  to  three  events  : 

(a)  What  will  come  upon  them  from  the  *  northern,'  see  on  xi.  44. 

(b)  The  tribulation  mentioned  in  Ps.  Ixxxiii,  which  refers  to  the  *  tents  of  the 
Edomites  and  Ishmaelites.' 

{c)  Gog,  the  last  tribulation  that  shall  befall  them. 
The  order  of  tribulations  then  will  be — (l)  in  the  time  of  the  Arms  ;  (2)  from  the 
northern  king;  (3)  from  the  'tents  of  Edom;'  (4)  Gog.    During  all  these  years  the 
purification  shall  go  on ;  cp.  Zech.  xiii.  9. 


Xir.  9.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  8i 

8.  Daniel  says,  *I  heard  the  voice  of  the  angel  saying  "  for  a  time,  times," '  etc.,  but 
I  did  not  imderstand.    He  did  not  understand  three  things : 

(«)  He  did  not  understand  the  length  of  a  IVIO  {v.  on  vii.  14):  *1X?10,  fiy,  py 
all  three  mean  the  same  :  a  ny  may  be  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  an  hour,  or  anything 
more,  e.g.  years.  The  words  for  a  time  therefore  conveyed  no  indication  of  a 
definite  period. 

(3)  He  did  not  know  when  these  times  commenced. 

(c)  The  word  times  conveyed  no  notion  of  the  number  of  times. 
And  I  said,  O  my  lord :  as  much  as  to  say  '  I  do  not  understand  what  thou 
sayest: — if  thou  canst  tell  me,  what  will  be  the  end  of  these  things?'  The  angel 
answ^ered  two  things,  {a)  his  question  what  shall  be  the  end  ?  {b)  his  saying  /  did  not 
understand  (though  the  angel  did  not  hear  this  last). 

9.  Are  shut  up :  cp.  viii.  26,  *  shut  up  the  vision ; '  only  that  was  said  to 
Daniel,  and  would  not  prove  that  no  one  else  understood  them ;  whereas  the 
words  *  for  they  are  shut  up  and  sealed '  indicate  that  they  are  hidden  from  the 
children  of  men. 

Till  the  time  of  the  end :  till  then  they  are  closed ;  thereafter  they  shall  be 
revealed. 

He  adds  that  at  that  time  many  shall  purify  themselves;  indicating  that 
the  end  shall  not  come  till  after  the  purification  of  the  nation  from  the  trans- 
gressors. 

Here  we  must  pause  a  moment.  Let  us  observe  that  there  are  certain  texts 
which  contain  signs,  the  occurrence  of  which  is  to  indicate  the  expected  deliverance. 
These  signs  are  of  two  classes ;  one  consisting  of  the  action  of  the  nation,  the  other 
of  the  action  of  God.  The  first  consists  in  our  returning  to  God,  the  second  in  many 
things  which  we  shall  recount.  As  for  our  returning  to  God,  it  is  mentioned  in  the 
following  passages :  Deut.  iv.  30,  xxx,  Hos.  xiv.  2,  Jer.  iii.  14.  Only  they  will  not 
return  to  God  till  after  great  afflictions,  as  has  been  said  before  in  this  chapter,  ver.  i. 
Cp.  Is.  lix.  20.  Some  of  the  Jews  have  been  misled  by  Is.  lix.  16, '  And  he  saw  that 
there  was  no  man,'  fancying  that  Israel  perhaps  would  not  repent,  and  the  deliverance 
come  to  them  without  repentance.  This  is  an  error;  could  the  deliverance  come 
without  repentance,  God  would  not  have  delayed  it  all  this  period.  We  can  only  say 
that  the  people  of  the  Captivity  at  the  end  of  this  last  dynasty  are  divided  into  two 
classes  :  a  good  class,  who  will  seek  knowledge  and  strive  thereafter,  and  will  multiply 
fasting  and  lamentation,  and  put  on  sackcloth,  and  grovel  in  ashes,  humiliating  them- 
selves, and  asking  God  to  deliver  His  people  ;  and  a  class  sunk  in  transgression, 
submerged  in  the  commission  of  capital  offences,  at  the  same  time  abhorring  the 
pious  sect,  and  accusing  them  and  looking  upon  them  as  hypocrites,  excommunicating 
them  and  driving  them  away,  because  they  will  not  assent  to  their  doctrine,  nor  adopt 
their  faith.  As  for  the  first  sect,  they  are  those  whose  conduct  is  described  in 
Is.  Iviii.  2,  'yet  they  seek  me  daily  and  delight  to  know  my  ways,'  where  the 
author  complains  of  wrong  being  committed  in  dealings  and  judgments  betweea 

[11.3-] 


82  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [XII.9. 

them  and  their  poor,  which  they  do  not  redress,  and  that  they  do  not  care  sufficiently 
for  the  weak;  see  the  chapter  throughout.  But  to  the  great  section,  the  mass  of 
the  nation,  he  says,  '  Behold  the  Lord's  hand  is  not  shortened  that  it  cannot 
save ;  but  your  iniquities  have  separated  between  you  and  your  God ;  for  your 
hands  are  defiled  with  blood,'  down  to  'yea,  truth  is  lacking'  (ver.  15).  It  is  to 
this  verse  that  the  words  '  He  saw  that  there  was  no  man '  refer.  The  words 
*  therefore  his  arm  brought  salvation  unto  him '  are  a  prophecy  of  tribulations  which 
shall  befall  these  evil-doers  till  certain  of  them  repent,  and  the  rest  perish ;  that 
the  former  words  refer  to  the  whole  nation  is  in  the  highest  degree  improbable. 
To  the  first  sect  he  says,  '  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  that  tremble  at  His  word;' 
where  he  tells  them  that  their  brethren  hate  them  and  revile  them,  saying  at  the  same 
time,  '  God  is  pleased  with  us,  and  for  our  sake  the  redemption  will  come  ; '  in  which 
they  are  deceived.  This,  then,  is  a  partial  account  of  what  has  been  told  us 
about  their  return  to  God,  after  which  the  redemption  will  come.  A  partial  account, 
too,  has  been  given  on  ver.  4.  Let  us  now  explain  what  will  be  the  course  of 
Israel's  conversion  to  God,  what  will  be  done  by  their  chiefs  and  what  by  the 
mass  of  them. 

The  chiefs  will  turn  to  the  Law  at  the  time  when  they  have  come  into  the  most 
miserable  state  of  poverty  and  straitened  circumstances,  and  their  enemies  among 
the  nation  and  the  great  sect  are  most  numerous. 

They  and  their  followers  are  the  people  whose  way  is  perfect.  The  great  sect  will 
wane,  those  who  follow  the  sayings  of  their  predecessors  ;  one  after  another  will 
confess,  till  the  two  thousand  three  hundred  begin.  At  the  time  of  the  demolition  of 
the  thrones  of  the  dynasties,  when  the  people  are  merged  in  the  tribulations,  the 
doctrines  of  the  chiefs  of  the  Jews  shall  be  exploded,  as  well  as  their  authority ;  and 
the  enemy,  the  temporal  lord,  shall  seek  them  out.  At  that  time  it  shall  become  clear 
to  the  multitude,  who  accept  their  authority,  that  the  truth  is  with  the  sect,  and  that  by 
it  the  redemption  shall  come.  They  will  return  to  the  Law  and  abandon  the  tradition 
of  those  who  cling  to  the  books  of  their  ancestors ;  and  then  God  shall  no  longer 
delay  the  redemption.  This  we  have  fully  and  satisfactorily  explained  in  the  Com- 
mentary on  Canticles ;  it  would  be  too  long  to  repeat  it  here.  This  is  what  we  are 
told  about  our  action  :  what  is  told  us  of  GolVs  action  may  also  be  divided  into  two 
parts.  One  refers  to  our  condition  prior  to  the  redemption  at  our  repentance ;  this 
is  recounted  in  Deut.  xxxii,  where  it  is  said  that '  the  Lord  shall  judge  His  people,' 
and  that  God  shall  take  vengeance  for  His  people  upon  their  enemies,  and  restore 
them  to  forgiveness  when  they  are  at  the  height  of  their  trouble,  and  none  of  them  has 
any  power :  'when  He  seeththat  their  power  is  gone,'  which  refers  (i)  to  the  weakness 
of  poverty ;  (2)  to  the  fact  that  there  are  no  royal  ministers  among  them,  as  there  were 
when  they  had  judges,  governors,  etc.,  who  attended  to  their  affairs,  so  that  they 
became  poor  after  having  been  rich  in  respect  of  rulers,  and  rich  in  merchants,  and 
resigned  their  possessions  :  v.  Zech.  viii.  10.  This  is  the  meaning  of  their  power  is 
gone  J   to  which  is  added,  'and  there  is  none  shut  up  or  left  at  large:'    i.e.  none 


XII.  lo.]  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  83 

of  them  has  power  to  bind  or  loose  any  more.  The  second  refers  to  the  condition 
of  the  Gentiles:  ibid.  35,  'Vengeance  is  mine,  and  recompense;'  indicating  that 
so  long  as  the  affairs  of  the  Gentiles  are  well  regulated,  we  shall  remain  in  our 
distress,  and  in  the  continuation  of  our  Captivity ;  but  when  they  begin  to  be 
reversed,  their  distress  shall  come,  and  they  shall  perish  quickly,  'for  the  day  of 
their  calamity  is  at  hand.' 

There  are  three  signs  of  salvation  :  when  they  appear,  the  wise  shall  feel  confident 
of  redemption.  Hence  he  says  they  are  sealed  and  closed  till  the  time  of  the 
end  :  when  the  end  approaches  it  shall  be  revealed.  God  in  His  mercy  has  seen  fit 
to  hide  it  from  them  ;  because,  if  they  had  known  how  long  the  Captivity  was  to  last, 
multitudes  of  the  people  would  have  perished  [apostatised].  He  left  them  therefore  in 
hope,  expecting  the  deHverance :  one  after  another  will  be  converted,  and  God's  anger 
will  cease.  And  when  the  time  comes,  these  signs  will  appear,  and  they  shall  know  that 
the  time  is  come  at  last ;  they  will  cling  to  their  faith  and  not  abandon  it,  save  a  few, 
as  we  said  above. 

10.  Many  shall  puriJfy  themselves :  the  people  are  divided  into  three  classes, 
excluding  a  fourth,  as  I  shall  now  explain.  He  said  above  (xi.  35)  to  refine  them 
and  to  purify ;  that  is  here  repeated,  to  shew  that  it  is  to  be  at  the  time  of  the  end. 
Purify  literally  means  winnow' ox  sift,  t^.g.  grain  from  chaff,  stones,  earth j  cf,  Jer.  iv. 
II ;  or  as  the  money-changer  separates  the  good  Dirham  from  the  bad,  or  clears  the 
good  from  the  bad  mixed  up  with  them.  The  meaning  is  :  there  are  among  the 
people  some  who  are  good  and  repentant,  who  are  the  wheat ;  and  also  wicked  ones 
who  eat  unlawful  food,  and  change  sabbaths  and  festivals,  commit  abominations,  and 
do  not  repent.  God  therefore  will  distinguish  between  them  by  destroying  the  bad, 
some  of  whom  will  perish  by  the  sword,  others  by  pestilence  ;  v.  supra,  and  compare 
Ezek.  XX.  38,  Amos  ix.  10.  As  yet  we  have  two  classes,  the  perfectly  righteous,  and 
the  completely  wicked.  Now  he  says  and  shall  whiten  themselves,  with  reference 
to  a  class  who  are  intermediate  in  religion,  who  keep  the  commandments,  but  not 
perfectly,  being  like  a  garment  which  has  got  marks  of  foulness,  which  requires  that 
those  stains  be  got  rid  of.  So  it  must  be  washed  ;  cp.  Is.  Ixiv.  5.  When  the  tribula- 
tions come  near,  they  will  discard  the  sins  that  are  about  them;  cp.  Jer.  ii.  22.  These 
are  a  stage  below  those  of  whom  it  is  said  they  shall  purify  themselves,  the  latter 
being  perfectly  righteous,  whereas  these  are  intermediate.  These  are  descriptions  of 
the  people  who  will  come  out  of  the  great  sect. 

And  be  refined :  a  description  of  the  great  sect  themselves,  who  are  compared 
to  silver  or  gold  mixed  with  dross,  i.e.  the  doctrines  which  they  have  inherited 
from  their  fathers,  so  that  they  assent  to  what  their  chiefs  tell  them,  and  confess  it. 
They  therefore  shall  undergo  tribulations  ;  God  will  refine  them,  so  that  they  shall 
discard  these  doctrines  and  return  to  the  Law  of  Jehovah.  This  describes  their 
state  shortly  before  the  appearance  of  Elijah,  as  we  have  explained  elsewhere 
(i.e.  in  the  Psalms). 

But  the  wicked  shall  do  wickedly :    i,  e.  those  that   do  wickedly  against 


84  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [Xll.  ii. 

the  covenant  (xi.  32).  They  are  the  portion  to  whom  I  alluded  on  the  words  'they  shall 
purify  themselves.'  He  means  they  shall  transgress  more  and  more  ;  and  not  under- 
stand, i.  e.  pay  no  regard  to  that  which  is  written  in  the  Book  of  God,  in  which  case 
they  might  have  turned  to  God,  or  might  never  have  abandoned  His  religion;  they 
are  the  people  who  allegorise  the  text,  as  we  said  before. 

But  they  that  be  wise  shall  understand  :  they  shall  turn  to  the  Book  of  God 
and  understand  its  contents,  and  know  that  what  God  said  in  His  Book  has  come  to 
pass.  Understanding  that,  they  will  make  Israel  understand  it,  who  will  then  cling  to 
the  Law  and  throw  off  the  sins  that  are  upon  them ;  they  shall  be  strong  and  do  exploits 
(xi.  32). 

II.  The  angel  now  explains  to  him  what  he  did  not  understand  in  ver.  7  {v.. 
supra) ;  shewing  him  that  a  time  and  times  refers  to  twelve  hundred  and  ninety 
days  ;  that  a  time  is  restricted  to  a  year,  and  times  to  two  years  and  no  more  ;  and 
that  a  half  is  something  less  than  a  year  ;  further  that  this  sum  of  four  years  all  but  a 
fraction  commences /r(7;«  the  time  that  the  continual  shall  be  removed.  The  continual 
has  now  been  mentioned  three  times,  of  which  the  first  is — 

viii.  II.  'It  took  away  from  him  the  continual,  and  the  place  of  his  sanctuary  was 
cast  down.' 

There  he  did  not  state  who  does  this ;  later  on  he  says  that  it  is  to  be  done  by 
certain  rulers,  antis  from  him  that  shall  stand  up  (xi.  31),  where  he  adds  that  *  they 
shall  profane  the  sanctuary  and  make  the  abomination  desolate.'  Which  last  he 
repeats  here,  to  shew  Daniel,  and  us  too,  that  the  times  commence  from  the  time  of 
the  removal  of  the  continual;  and  that  at  the  end  of  the  twelve  hundred  and  ninety 
days  the  tribulations  shall  be  ended.  This  he  explained  to  Daniel,  and  taught  him  what 
he  did  not  know.  Now  we  must  give  the  reason  why  he  says  a  time,  times,  and 
a  half,  with  the  word  time  once  in  the  singular  and  once  in  the  plural,  instead  of 
saying  three  times.  We  will  answer  this  question  as  best  we  can.  These  times  being 
years,  as  we  have  said,  begin  with  the  time  of  the  retnoval  of  the  continual ; 
Isaiah's  three  years,  as  we  said,  are  identical  with  the  time  and  times;  at  the  end  of 
one  year  of  these  three,  Isaiah  tells  us,  'the  glory  of  Kedar  will  cease,  and  his  warriors 
be  few ; '  that  year  is  therefore  the  tittie,  which  is  distinguished  here  as  the  first  year 
of  the  three,  wherein  'the  whole  glory  of  Kedar  shall  perish  ;'  the  other  two  years  (or 
times)  will  be  of  one  tenor,  viz.  in  them  '  the  glory  of  Moab  '  will  be  finally  '  brought  to 
contempt.'  Isaiah  does  not  speak  of  the  half-year,  because  it  is  in  the  time  after  the 
fall  of  Ishmael  :  probably  'half  is  an  approximation  merely,  being  really  more  than 
half,  and  lasting  from  the  time  of  the  conquest  of  Babylon  by  the  king  of  the  north 
till  Israel  enter  Palestine  from  the  *  wilderness  of  the  peoples,'  after  which  the  king  of 
the  north  shall  perish.  Next,  it  is  clear  that  as  the  years  of  a  hireling  refers  to  lunar 
years  ;  this  will  make  the  three  years  thirty-six  months,  or  a  thousand  and  sixty-five 
days,  which  will  leave  out  of  the  twelve  hundred  and  ninety  days  two  hundred  and 
twenty-five,  which  make  half  a  time,  as  we  have  said,  the  word  ''Vn  in  the  Hebrew 
language  being  sometimes  used  for  an  exact  half,  sometimes  for  slightly  more  or  less,  as 


XII.  13.]  '  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  8^ 

we  shewed  from  Isaiah.  Here  it  is  rather  more  ;  and  during  this  half-time  there  will 
be  an  excitement  in  the  world  caused  by  the  king  of  the  north,  starting  from  the  time 
when  Ishmael  is  destroyed  and  left  without  a  chief.  He  will  go  out  from  Babylon  till 
he  perishes  in  the  land  of  Israel,  as  we  have  explained  at  xi.  44. 

12.  These  days  are  not  the  same  as  those  mentioned  above,  nor  are  we  told  when 
they  are  to  commence,  nor  when  they  end.  They  do  not  come  within  the  days  of  the 
kingdoms.  The  person  who  waits  must  already  have  got  into  the  time,  times,  etc. ; 
he  will  then  count  them,  knowing  that  they  are  a  short  period,  which  will  [soon]  end, 
when  he  will  be  freed  from  the  tribulations,  and  then  he  shall  come  to  these  thirteen 
hundred  and  thirty-five  days.  These  persons  are  the  good,  whose  way  is  perfect,  and 
their  followers.  This  has  been  noticed  by  Moses  in  Psalm  xc.  At  the  end  of  that 
psalm  he  says  'with  long  life  will  I  satisfy  him;'  some  people  will  doubtless  die  during 
the  time  and  times;  hence  he  says  blessed  is  he  that  waiteth  and  reaches,  since 
not  every  one  that  waits  will  reach.  Most  probably  they  begin  from  the  destruction 
of  the  king  of  the  north,  when  Israel  will  begin  to  prosper  and  their  power  to  increase. 
In  them  will  be  the  second  gathering  of  Israel,  prophesied  by  Jeremiah  (xxxv.  9).  In 
those  days  the  Messiah  will  appear  and  Israel  shall  be  secure. 

At  the  end  of  those  days  Gog  shall  come,  and  God  shall  deal  vengeance  upon 
him  ;  that  will  be  on  the  last  day  of  the  thirteen  hundred  and  thirty-five.  After  Gog 
shall  be  the  reign  of  the  Messiah  over  the  people  of  the  whole  world.  The  thirteen 
hundred  and  thirty-five  are  separated  from  the  latter,  because  in  them  there  will  be 
some  troubles,  though  they  will  be  after  the  consummation  of  the  monarchies,  and 
most  of  what  we  expect  will  come  to  pass  in  them. 

13.  He  said  above  (ver.  9)  go  Daniel,  without  saying  whither.  Here  he  explains 
this  :  go,  i.e.  pass  away,  thou  and  Israel  in  thy  sorrow  to  thy  grave,  as  the  rest  have 
passed  away  till  the  time  of  the  end. 

And  thou  shalt  rest :  sc.  in  thy  grave  ;  cp.  Is.  Ivii.  2.  We  do  not  know  where 
that  grave  was;  most  probably  in  Babylon,  as  he  did  not  go  up  to  the  Second 
Temple,  as  seems  clear ;  since,  in  the  third  year  of  king  Cyrus,  he  was  in  Babylon ; 
whereas  the  people  had  gone  up  in  Cyrus'  first  year. 

Thou  shalt  stand :   i.  e.  rise  from  the  grave. 

In  thy  lot :  either  (i)  the  place  of  the  reward  which  he  had  earned  ;  or  (2)  the 
land  of  Israel,  wherein  he  had  a  lot;  so  that  he  is  to  live  a  long  time  at  the  time  of  the 
redemption,  and  rejoice  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  Almighty,  and  the  reunion  of  the  nation. 
After  this  God  shall  take  him  alive  to  the  place  of  reward  among  the  angels. — I  prefer 
the  second  view. 

Then  he  tells  him  when  he  shall  rise  to  be  rewarded  ;  at  the  end  of  the  days : 
i.e.  most  probably  at  the  end  of  the  thirteen  hundred  and  thirty-five  days  God  shall 
raise  him  up  and  bring  him  to  his  lot;  and  at  that  time,  too,  shall  be  that  resurrection 
of  their  dead  which  God  has  promised  :  *  Behold,  I  will  open  your  graves,  and  cause 
you  to  come  up  out  of  your  graves,  O  my  people '  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  12) ;  and  then,  too,  He 
will  shew  them  what  He  has  promised  (cp.  Ps.  cvi.  4). 


86  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  [xil.  13. 

Let  us  ask  God  Almighty  to  bring  this  near  in  our  days  and  yours ;  not  to  deny  us 
or  you  abundant  knowledge  of  His  Book,  revelation  of  His  secrets,  and  attachment  to 
His  faith  ;  to  sanctify  His  sanctuary,  and  shew  us  its  restoration  ;  for  the  sake  of  His 
great  name,  and  His  abundant  mercies.    Amen. 

We  have  explained  this  chapter  in  accordance  with  what  we  have  heard  from  the 
teachers  of  the  Captivity,  or  read  in  their  books,  so  far  as  those  theories  seemed 
probable.  God  will  forgive  and  pardon  any  slips  or  errors,  in  His  goodness  and 
gentleness.  We  shall  now  follow  this  with  a  statement  of  the  views  of  others  about 
these  times  and  the  end,  that  any  one  who  cares  to  know  them  may  do  so.  The 
scholars  who  preceded  Joseph  ibn  Bakhtawl  explained  the  2300,  1290,  and  1335 
2t.%yearsj  the  Rabbanites,  too,  spoke  of  the  end,  and  fancied  that  from  the  third  year 
of  Cyrus  to  the  end  would  be  1335  years  ;  the  term  is  passed  some  years  since,  so  that 
their  opinion  has  been  disproved,  and  that  of  their  followers  ;  similarly  El-FayyumI 
explained  it  years,  and  has  been  proved  false ;  he  had  however  some  marvellous 
inventions  with  reference  to  the  time  and  times.  He  was  answered  by  Salmon  ben 
Jerucham  ;  whom  we  need  not  in  our  turn  answer,  since  his  term  is  past  and  the  end 
not  arrived.  Certain  of  the  Karaites,  too,  made  the  2300  years  date  from  the  exodus 
from  Egypt ;  that  term  too  is  past  years  ago,  and  their  prophecy  not  come  true. 
Salmon  ben  Jerucham,  in  his  Commentary  on  Ps.  Ixxiv.  9,  denied  that  it  was  possible 
to  ascertain  the  end j  but  on  Ps.  cii.  14  he  offered  a  date  which  is  passed  and  falsified. 
He  agreed  with  many  others  in  interpreting  the  2300  and  1290  as  days,  but  differed 
about  the  interpretation  of  the  time  of  the  removal  of  the  continual,  which,  he 
thought,  meant  the  destruction  of  the  Second  Temple.  Benjamin  Nahawendl  agreed 
with  him  in  the  latter  point,  but  differed  from  him  about  the  days  being  days 
and  not  years.  Benjamin  took  a  separate  view  in  believing  that  they  were  years. 
Salmon  ben  Jerucham  referred  the  1290  to  the  three  and  a  half  spoken  of  in 
chap.  x.  27  ('  for  the  half  of  the  week  he  shall  cause  the  sacrifice  and  the  oblation 
to  cease'). 

Each  of  the  commentators  has  taken  a  different  line,  and  all  have  gone  wrong  in 
making  the  days  years.  Benjamin  Nahawendl,  indeed,  made  the  2300  date  from  the 
destruction  of  Shiloh,  and  from  the  time  of  the  removal  of  the  continual  from  the 
destruction  of  the  Second  Temple;  this  leaves  still  some  400  years ;  but  this  is  a 
delusion. 

All  these  theories  are  confuted  by  two  facts  : 

(i)  Their  inventors  profess  to  know  the  end,  whereas  the  Scripture  says  that  the 
matter  is  closed  and  sealed;  any  one  therefore  who  professes  to  know  it  before  the  time 
of  the  end  is  professing  what  cannot  be  true. 

(2)  They  make  the  days  years.  Now  we  know  that  where  he  speaks  of  weeks  of 
years  he  expressly  distinguishes  them  from  weeks  of  days  j  consequently  none  of  the 
three  sums  mentioned  (2300,  1290,  1335)  can  be  years.  All  must  be  days.  The  one 
commentator  who  made  them  days  supposed  the  three  periods  to  follow  one  upon  the 


XII.  13.]  -  COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.  87 

other;  i.e.  he  made  the  2300  the  first  time,  the  1290  the  second,  the  1335  the  third. 
He  fancied  there  was  no  statement  of  the  number  of  days  of  the  half-time j  he  sug- 
gested that  it  might  be  half  the  first  time.  Assuredly  this  is  more  probable  than  the 
views  of  the  others. 

We  have  now  given  the  views  that  seem  to  us  clear  or  probable.  Let  us  now  ask 
God  to  pardon  any  slips  or  errors ;  for  what  we  have  given  is  not  any  positive  opinion, 
but  merely  a  probability.  The  Almighty  himself  has  said  that  the  words  are  shut  up 
and  sealed  till  the  time  of  the  end.  At  that  time  it  shall  be  revealed  at  the  hand  of 
the  wise;  the  wise  shall  understand.  God  Almighty,  in  His  mercy  and  loving- 
kindness,  bring  near  their  realisation.    Amen. 


GLOSSARY. 


\jUio\  now  for  icLJl  Is.  xlviii.  7;   spelt  »-*-. 1  MS.  2474,  p.  46*. 

»-?^  i«>>vi^i  (Pers.)  tin  MS.  2472,  p.  17a  djjyj.-ui«,l  ^^\  CHPI  ''i'3  J^L^  t.  Ji^ 

w 

t>J!  (ii)  for  jjj.     Is.  lix.  4  (n>hn)  JwJlJ. 

*.^JJi  ^«^fi?  si  MS.  2468,  p.  106*  JoUll  J^.  *4iJl  ^«/o^  «  dixerit  aliquis. 
MS.  2467,  p.  84a  sy^b    ^    ^U  jjsJ-J    ^1   ^^ljucj.     MS.  2468,  p.  5a  ^\ 

(^i  MS.  2473,  p.  85^  c^?*'  U^  A:y^  Jjl  (the  classical  language  would  here 
have  used  no  particle).  Ibid.  64*  Jj».juj  ^jl  z*-"^?-*  (^^  c>^'  ^o™™-  0^  ^^'  ^^'  4  ic*''  vP 
l»..^JL»  »jJJ».b  ^jlj  Ps.  Ixi.  2  ^i^  *— »/-^.  u'  J-^^  (_?*'  ^^®''®  vJ^  ^^y  ^®  ^®P* 
(omitted  by  Barg^is).     MS.  2468,  p.  188^. 

'i^'A  Lat.  antes (^).     For  i)iKn  i  Kings  vi.  31. 

^4!  (ii)  and  (v)  Jj'b  /«?  equivocate  MS.  2500  (Comm.  on  Kings,  p.  191^)  *^^jl  (A^ 
Jyill  Ijui  jci  JjLJj  !iJj-JLlaj  t^JJi  J-*yJ^  /J^-  Used  often  in  this  book  and  elsewhere  of 
*  explaining  away '  texts  of  scripture,  miracles,  etc. ;  see  pp.  i  • .  15,  I  r.  15,  1  r  r.  2,  I  ta.  6. 
Compare  eyib«b  p.  ^r.  il,  13. 

O**^^  cJ^^  nudius  tertius  (Dti'PtJ')  Ex.  xxi.  36. 

sj*!  fern,  of  Jjl  Fleischer,  KL  Schr.  i.  336;  Comm.  on  Prov.  (i»aris),  p.  ^^ ^^ 
^^y^yi\  ^ja^a\.W.    Here,  p.  iri,  n.  i. 

(^_;uuJ>j  (Syr.  1^()  Dan.  iii.  15  *X-«ol  etc.    Used  apparently  only  in  translations. 

iJ\o\ji  MS.  2468,  p.  199^  sLiAJi  ^^l5C5r^jbb  tj-j^^  .  ♦ .  niynjon. 

j<v-lAOO  Comm.  on  Amos  ii.  12  i:yLsr*.iLJl  ^jfc«  i_A-yflJl  liyt-J  l4-oj«J. 
i^jX>   I  Kings  xxi.  10  for  i^VPl  ""ja  ^^j-»Jfi-Jl   (^^JU»^1.     Compare  ^4  f (?«/«- 
macia  (Vullers  s.  v.). 

eycs^  (iii)  i2i.L-o  trying  his  fortune  MS.  2500,  p.  159*. 

[II.  3.] 


90  GLOSSARY. 

^C}J>  Ex.  xxxiv,  19  for  ntja  ^.  .jj. 

tl>.     \ji,  (Jl  /or^zj  Ps.  xli.  6  (Barg&s). 

Ja^.     t^.l  Num.  xiii.  20  (np  DN  NIH  HJOttTl)  iiLJ.>   J  U^,l  Ja  ^_^^1  ^1^. 

O;*L-0\^  MS.  2467,  p.  44^)  reckoned  among  articles  of  food  .U  ^\  a-b^  ^. 

(J1*0  (Persian)  <?«/)/  MS.  2478,  p.  22^  jj«o  gjUl  ^^^  (:?)]>*■  u^  ^ * .n ar^^    jtSjl. 

(Jdajlo  architrave  {fTna-ruXiov)  MS.  2500,  p.  42^  ^».\iU...  .\\      i^  i^asLjI. 

^jiia>  practice  Ex.  xxxv.  25  (.TTa  l!?  DOin)  ^JiJiJl  isjU.. 

jjiLLJl  is  the  immediate  actor,  as  opposed  to  ^^1,  while  uyljJyJl  are  actions 
accomplishing  themselves  when  once  started,  e.  g.  if  a  man  shoots  an  arrow  and  dies 
before  it  hits  the  mark.     MS.  2467,  p.  186*. 

jjo  (vi)  to  trample  down  Is.  v.  5  for  nyai?  ^LiJJ.    Coram,  ibid.  »^U-»  Jjjl  lil 
Sj^L:i>  j-ijfc ;  Sj^L^j   (V^^  Vi^ •     Ex.  xxii.  4    iJt-J  for  "lyi''. 
C_fyt>  to  shake  Comm.  on  Is.  xxix.  7  dJLJwl  11  ju*  ^3^ju».:J  ^  Juo. 
JaA>.     U^l  explanation  of  JOB*  p  Is.  v.  i  c*->JiJ  u")/*^^  U-s-»   u^j/*  ^i'  C^JJ' 

cVa->  (v)  jX^oil  for  Dp!)  Is.  X.  18. 

SJct  (v)  Spec.  p.  22.  15  a51i^1  S/**^"^    (BARGi:a  :  Arbor  firmd). 
^^  (ii)  for  pp13  Hos.  x.  i    %jyKJi. 

^0Csx3  (Pers.  »^)  for  Q^tTlp  Ex.  xxvi.  15  (anwri). 
(^Jt>.     iiliJ  J^///  Comm.  on  Pro  v.  xiv.  i  etc. 

"Is  to  be  possible  MS.  2472,  p.  16^^  J  ^  L»  L^jl*  Jib  ^^1  ».JLc  t--*A-jl  U-il 
sJlST;  MS.  2500,  p.  157a  Ijijjtij  jjl  ^j^  *J  ijl;  here,  p.  irv.  26  etc.    (Classical.) 

^iS  for  }0N3  Is.  xlix.  7,  here,  p.  ir.  17  dual  ^jLxJLJ  Comm.  on  Is.  viii.  i,  plur. 

jUJi.    "Is  »i\  'il  y  a,'  there  is  here,  p.  rl.  19. 
'^>»Jsi  dualists  here,  p.  vr.  12. 

oVa.  (for  c_)  *U.),  impf.  t_/w^,  infin.  ijla.1.  With  additional  i^  e.g.  Is.  xli.  2 
&j  ^_*->-s^  j^^LjJI  i^y     Cant.  p.  ro^.  5. 


GLOSSARY.  91 

(juuU:^  MS.  2500,  p.  44a  ^  ij^  »^j  u^J^.  u-U^  l!^  »J^  tP^  (J 
KJs^U.  ^^  Ut»-j  J^-»  o-fJl  JJ>U,  p.  44a. 

J^-   JV'Ij   ^«^  -y^  ('w,  o«^  thenceforth   Comm.  on   Is.  Ixiii.  8    ^j.*  "liy  jjUj 

^j^   /(?  ^•J^r^^  (Heb.  nra)    MS.  2467,  p.  73b   ^,^Jlc  ^j^  ^^1   Jl.     MS.  2474, 
p.  63a, 

c)j^  to  rob  (Heb.  7W)  Comm.  on  Is.  Iviii.  6  (•4-l>-j  u-^'  f^  vy>- 
*-i»  Jl^  captivity  (Heb.  ni?a).     Plur.  exJl^   Comm.  on  Is.  Ivi.  10.     Rel.  adj. 
^^^L».  here,  p.  ita.  12. 
_jU^  (v)  /(?  <5^fo/«^  a  proselyte,  nj,  Cant.  p.  "ji^  ult.  *b^l  ^J^  j_g9  UJls^. 
C_$*^  rel.  adj.  from  ""IJ  MS.  2467,  p.  202^. 
%*^  (v)  to  marry  (for  _ jj)  David  b.  Abr.  s.  v.  1"|K. 

^eX^..     ^^i  for  IVDP  Is.  V.  19.     Compare  here  p.  ro.  15. 

j2»^.     jr^?*"  ^  responsible  person  MS.  2467,  p.  6a  etc. 

^juww^  ««  incantation  MS.  2475,  p.  23b  s.^.,^^  »jtiJL}  ^y^. 

C->,^.     lijj^  plur.  (j^]^  for  D"'2n5y  Is.  vi.  2. 

L^v^.  ^jl  <.£/*-^  in  the  sense  of  ^/^Li  scarcely  here,  p.  v.  10;  compare 
Spec.  p.  15.  n  i-t-o-lj  ijj^"  ^  t^^b^  a\  » y.v^  AJK**-  l^b  Jj  «^^«z7i  ?</  sit 
necessaria  (BakgAs  :  ubi potissimum  firmis  erat  opus). 

iLiSi..     la^Jajfc  the  lowest  depth  ((^,i-yaj».?),  here,  p.  ir.  8. 

^^^.  ^^U.  MS.  2472,  p.  148a  ijI:l-o.  _j1  ijL>jJ.l  ^^gs  ijj5o^^^_^j  n^y  nw. 

jtXs^  (viii)  Comm.  on  Is.  Ixv.  8  c^-^jjJl  ^5^1  lil  gj  AJ;J  n^Tin  NV»''  "lEJ'iO 
sX^fl.)   ^^    *Wj'      r*^^"*  l/*^  here,  p.  1  1  I.  21. 

\U:w.     »^U.l  for  nrnx  in  Translation  of  Numbers  (MS.  2473). 

^Jl^  (iv)  to  declare  impossible  Comm.  on  Is.  ii.  p.  211^  ^^\  ^  j^j;^ ^  U 

jL.Tw  plur.  jijjjfc  for  niHTO  Is.  vi.  4,  and  passim. 
C->\^  (vi)  erupit  aqua  Comm.  on  Is.  xxx,  25. 


9»  GLOSSARY. 

fjy>.  a  spot  on  a  garment  MS.  2468,  p.  5^  ^y  ^  xij  j^  JJL«  U. 
ij^^.     (j^Ll*.  for  ?]N  Is.  Ixiii.  8  etc.;  for  pi  Is.  vi.  i. 

^  «^    Comm.  on  Ex.  xxvii.  8  .4 Jo  Uj  (jlk**  J  J.**  ci>^  J-^i'i  ^J^  (<^ 
-Uil  Jo'\y^.  ».'.  v*>  T'l^n   U-^-^Jj-     MS.  2468,  p.  144a. 

8L>it>  (Pers.)  a  nurse,  plur.  cybU  Comm.  on  Is.  Ix.  16. 
*Xt>.    *JX.  ambiguous  MS.  2500,  p.  155^  j^Xo  j,^l5l>  in"'3"'tD  u.l*iU. 
(Jjit>  Comm.  on  Is.  xxxi.  23  Jjj  olr*^^  i^  i-*^\  PO* 
^t>  (iii)  for  'inK'  Hos.  v.  14  etc. 
oUt>  for  (jijl  Ps.  cxix.  28. 

Otiio  /<>  ro«/>/<?  for  lan.     Ex.  xxvi.  3  iiiJju*  (n*i3n). 
{jyOcy^l^  for  D''tJ'1N3  Is.  v.  2. 
^_>o^lt>  a  course  of  bricks,  etc.  [b6fios)  MS.  2500,  p.  35*  ,j«w«lji  j_jl\  u.  ^L-l 

C.){>ji.O  Z''  zf^a/f/^   Hos.  ix.  8    ^.>JL)X•.     Prov.  xv.  3   »Ui   (C-^f*   /*''t>^  J"^^^  Lf* 
jLo.ju*  read  ajJujJ^.     Regularly  in  Psalms  for  Heb.  flBV. 

(_^>Aj'     *-**^^)  and  onwards  MS.  2472,  p.  14*  u-*Ali«  ,^^1  *^^  j^- 

(jjwK.     JUI  t^l^  capital,  dual  ^^UI  4^]^  MS.  2468,  p.  23^. 
(^\j.     fjjS  J  .  .  Lo  (^  whether — or.     MS.  2467,  p.  56*. 

(w>^    plur.   to*5i   for  Heb.  IS   passim.     Barges  on  Ps.  1.  9 ;    the  meaning  was 
noticed  by  Eichhorn,  Einleitung  ins  A.  T.  i.  519. 

ll^^^^jS^  liquid  passim;    MS.  2472,  p.  26*  nil  Uj"  1^3Nn  N7  DIJI  j_^  JUj 

OtUIiLu^  for  niD"'l33  Is.  iii.  19.    (Vullers  :  &,;,^.-;  >».  'vox  dubia.') 
^juu^  plur.  (j-jj.  Cant.  i.  17;   see  Bargj^s  ad  1. 

(J^  (ii)  viduam  fecit  Comm.  on  Is.  x.  3.     (v)  JJ^^  status  viduae  Comm.  on 
Is.  Ixi.  10. 

J^   to  wish  with  Jl  MS.  2468,  p.  188*  sJLol  Jl   A  L.  J  o.^>  V. 
fiyi,   (Pers.  sij.)  Comm.  on  Num.  xxii.  30  X^y^t  ^JL^-Ji  (%J^1  J-«-»J  ^  Jj«i. 
iJO.   a  socket  {!)  MS.  2468,  p.  114*  (of  the  'rings'  of  the  ark)  cyly.  i^  L^l 


GLOSSARY.  93 

iji*y^  Ci  tap  (for  water)  Coram,  on  i  Kings  vii.  29  lil  ^^\  ^J:^j!\  ^_-»  HVvJl 
_lii  L^j  ^^fliJ  I4-J  *U1  -^  cy^^.     MS.  2500,  p.  50^ 

(^>i^\   Comm.  on  Is.  xix.  3  ilJu:  e*JLC,^  31N  ni>yi  DB^X. 

jS.\   i  Kings  iv.  27  I4J  ey^^j  l^^aj  for  n?  mO  nB>S3.     (v)  Here,  p.  11  v.  23. 
j».C%  for  t]yt  here,  p.  S.  13.     (v)  Frequently  for  Qyt. 
J^j^  /<?  </raz£;  water  MS.  2500,  p.  49*  d^-Jl  ^^  AJfi  Uj  *U1  »_u  ^jj. 
(^t3•^  Comm.  on  Is.  xxix.  21   J^lj  ajj«jJ1  j^>*^  *4Ji  '^>-*^  ^^  K  r**^-*— • 

(_>juuA*x/  (ii)  to  overhang  for  mO  Ex.  xxvi.  12  bis. 

JfsKxj'     i*.*.^U  the  poor  Comm.  on  Prov.  xiii.  23  etc. 

(.Jlasuju  contumely  for  )"i7p  Prov.  ii.  34.  (iv)  ».»  i_ii-''  ^^  insulted  him  MS. 
2500,  p.  157b 

jLk>.     1^^  for  ISItl'  Ps.  xlvii.  5  etc. 

eyUJuJLju  (Syr.)  for  niSSnn  Prov.  ii.  1 4  etc. 

cJuLw  Comm.  on  Prov.  xii.  5  »^-^^l  s^^^  J-*-^^^  (JJJI  u-ii-dl  J^^SS\ ;  ibid, 
p.  64a  *^^  ^^jAiL>.}. 

OAJs^iLw  for  |1t3K  Prov.  vii.  13. 

*.iUw  (ii)  (from  ^Ux«.i)  to  make  straight  Is.  xl.  3;  *jL-»  for  ntJ>'')D  l  Kings  vi.  35. 

cJlUw  for  p'lpnn  Prov.  ii.  16. 

{^Y^'     KSy-"^  (for  Ijj :■•->««■'")  directly  here,  p.  11.  14. 

jUa^.  a-^-J:.  a  false  religion  Spec.  p.  17.  11  i^.*Jt,  sJ  l^lslj.  (BARois :  staiuam 
in  honorem  eius  erigunt.)  ■> 

(^X£it  for  7ntJ',  JyLiL.*  Ps.  i.  3,  xcii.  13  (BARG:fcs);  J^Li*  surculi  Ps.  cxxviii.  3. 

tfJoLi  for  S'l'TUD   2  Kings  vi.  1 8  etc.,  David  b.  Abr.  s.  v. 

Li  whether  Ex.  xl.  22  (MS.  2468,  p.  204b)  »^  \  jnnN  Li,  MS.  2472,  p.  74b 
jjj^  .1   (kY^j^  (jlS  Lii,  here,  p.  00.  14;    Spec.  p.  18.  8. 

xXms  here,  p.  co.  8,  <J1Jli11  is-J  J  ^Jl5  ji_u>  j^J  ikXlUl  ^,u  ^  i^lj. 

c  wjso  Ps.  xxxii.  4  (-J^  (_JLflJl  conversus  est  humor  mens  Barg^is, ibid.  p.  59,  n.  3. 

{^jjjJLh  (ii)  to  despise  Comm.  on  Ps.  xxii.  5  (Hoffmann). 

jijsjjo  for  mpnn  i  Kings  xviii.  45 ;  (ii)  for  finip  Is.  1.  3.  Often  spelt  ^i^  or 
fr^^  Barges  on  Ps.  xxxv.  14. 


94  GLOSSARY. 

i^ijAC  Num.  xiii.  23  .syLLxJl  L^  oolS   ^^1  ijLoJl.     MS.  2474,  p.  62^. 

(_kc  J^<r/z<7«  MS.  2472,  p.  25b  :>jsu>  ^Jjo^  HQItai  rhz'i  s^  j^j. 

^eXs:  p.^  //^  process  whereby  any  food  is  changed  from  its  natural  state,  and 
the  result  of  that  process ;  see  Appendix;  MS.  2472,  p.  104''  ijyilill  p^Uj^i  jtaju  J 
Ou^-Jl  ^jjt  -.iLxJlj.     Here,  p.  ir.  14  etc. 

CJIAC  (v)  jjlxi  an  excuse  MS.  2475,  p.  5*. 

*JLc.  JLc  <2  /arg^^  number  here  passim;  in  Spec,  p.  15.  8  the  correction  .V»g  is 
unnecessary. 

(Jk4£  with  ^ic  /<?  intend  here,  p.  ee.  8 ;   to  suppose  MS.  2468,  p.  185*  jJu:  J-»*l 

cyi^  for  *liy  Num.  xxii.  30  TTiyO  for  dJ^^  ^;>-•,  passim  in  Isaiah.  Sometimes 
written  jlp,  whence  Eichhorn  wrongly  supposed  it  to  be  a  transhteration  of  the 
Heb.  Tiy. 

H^Ukj^IxJI  the  Pharisees  here,  p.  H.  13,  =  the  Rabbanites,  D''3n,  as  the  Sefer 
ha-'osher  interprets ;  the  Karaites  are  similarly  called  *  Sadducees.' 

^nX9  extent.     See  here,  pp.  rr.  5,  rv.  17. 

iJy>jj  (for  jLojJ?  yet  derived  by  Jepbet  himself  from  jJa  L«)  for  nionn 
Ex.  XXV.  I  etc. 

2^A/yjuJ  perquisite  Comm.  on  Is.  xxxii.  6^--jtll.  ---jH  ^j-«  Lft.j^b  jpL«J  ^^J ; 
(ju^opi  li-A^i^  ibid. 

f,A9  to  grin  Comm.  on  Ps.  xxii.  8  (Hoffmann). 

^^j3  (Pers.)  cacare  Comm.  on  Ex,  x.  21  silx-»  ^J  J^  J^'j  lH  U^  iS"^''  ^^"^ 
for  niXiriD  in  2  Kings  x.  27 ;  ii^  for  HNIV  Is.  xxviii.  8 ;  cp.  Fleischer,  Kl.  Schr. 
i.  169. 

(jLwUaAJ  for  {^oa  Is.  xh.  6,  in  Comm. :     <U^1    _jU.-J1  i->i-o-i>   l?jJ1  (jLi  ^^ 

(^li  fut.  *— ft-jj  (Weiterbildung  of  ^J?)  to  take  refuge  here,  p.  1*6.  14. 

Jby^  Ji  (ii)  for  Heb.  IK'pnn  2  Kings  ix.  14  etc.  Hence  it  appears  that  the  D''">B'p 
mentioned  passim  here  are  the  Carmathians. 

O-jOB.  ^^  sJwaS  Jjt-*.  /(?  /a-^'^  note  of  here,  p.  Ta.  21  ;  Comm,  on  Prov,  vii.  10 
(P-  34^)- 


GLOSSARY.  95 

JUa9  Prov,  iv.  15  ^^  oUl  Jtiijl  /^w  away  from.  Perhaps  however  we  should 
read  *Utlj  Spec.  p.  18,  18  sJLol  ^  *U1  «J23  he  allows  no  compromise.  (BARoiis ; 
*  h.  e.  interpretatione  non  egent  verba.') 

^^vjlj  (for  ^jUj)  passim,  Prov.  xvi.  8  etc. 

jji^  a  he-goat  {cxi^exl')  Qifyn  "TiyB^  Lev.  ix.  3;  here,  pp.  ai.  18,  st.  7,  etc. 

{^jM^  to  surprise  here,  p.  irr.  16.  Comm.  on  Prov.  iii.  24  .j^  ^^  9-'r^  ^ 
8_A— 5o  (read  5-...J0) ;  ibid.  uyLw..JJl  ^1  jsj  ^.^jLj  &Nna  *inSO. 

j»y^  (ii)  to  be  vexed  here,  p.  ir.  4  etc.;  Ps.  Ixxii.  4;  cf.  rh^+OO; 

(^^juaT  (vii)  to  gather  together  MS.  2468,  p.  89b  j^l^l  A-^j».  j^  i'>  -;<M, 

^j;»5' (v)  see  here,  p.  11.  7. 

'i-^fi^  common  form  in  MSS.  (e.g.  2468,  p.  ipy^J  bis)  for  i-^;  perhaps  by 
false  analogy  from  jjJlS. 

X>yi>^  (for  1^  ^?)  Ps.  cxix.  119;  'ex  comment,  videtur  hac  voce  innui  scon'as,' 
Barges. 

CJUiaJ  prep,  for  Heb.  7VN  Prov.  vii.  8,  here,  p.  fi.  2. 

(jl*»aJ  with  suffixes  j_5:--J  for  cu-J  Ex.  xxiii.  7,  &.»>^  Lev.  xi.  39,  here,  p.  r^.  15. 

jUaX/O  (or  rather  i^-j^u)  for  niTlO  plur.  c^L^o  Cant.  p.  vr^  ad  fin. 
[^Jis4JMk/^  {[J"  «".^)  for  D"I3  Num.  xxiv.  8. 

f^jKjj>/9.  Here,  p.  ler-.  10  sJLol  ^jLc  ^^^i^  he  took  a  separate  view;  see  also 
p.  irf.  20. 

7rc)J»^  for  IT'jyO  Ps.  cxxix.  3  (probably  corrupt). 
»^o\-sX4^  see  here,  p.  c^.  9. 

j^aa3  for  n?33  Ps.  Ixxix.  2. 
v£*3  ^?^^r?'  Barges  Ps.  Iv.  2,  17;  Is.  liii.  8. 
(JosO  (ii)  complanare  for  ^3Q  Is.  xl.  3 ;  Ps.  Ixxx.  9. 

Jai  (iii)  with  ^jS.  to  answer  for  Is.  xU.  2 1  1^>,..pj  ^^  ^Lj  ^i»  jGUiic-*  lyU, 
here,  p.  ia.  2. 

(i^Ai  deficient  (adj.),  here,  p.  ^S.  11. 

i>^.     sJl^  suspiritus  Barges  on  Ps,  xxxviii.  9. 


g6  GLOSSARY. 

C_f  b  /ogive  light  for  n''Nn  Ex.  xxv.  37  ;  Comm.  on  Ex.  xl.  38  (MS.  2468,  p.  206") 
J-JlJb  Jh*^"  S^nJI. 

ib  for  I  before  hemza;  Ex.  xvii.  7  (j-jL*,  MS.  2500,  p.  191^;  here,  p.  rl*.  3. 
Baidawl  on  Sura  iii.  59. 

^-J^  to  strike  Comm.  on  Prov.  xviii.  6  \^j^V  ^*-tJl ;  ^U^i  for  niDPHD  Prov. 
xviii.  6,  8. 

jJlA.     JLaj  and  onwards  MS.  2468,  p.  104^  JUj   xjLJI  (,y^\' 

1a  also  MS.  2475,  p.  13^  LjjI  p73  J^  ^jO  ^j.  Comm.  on  Prov.  p.  iio^ 
mtD  a? y>>  jfJb  -^^  Ijl  ijlTjIi,  here,  pp.  iv.  4,  1  ri«.  9.     Eichhorn  I.e. 

{jf\^  Ex.  xxvi.  19  for  D^JTN. 

t)..^.j4  here,  p.  ro.  15  Iju^  j^\^  for  nyac  Iflj  see  Noldekb,  Syr.  Gram.  p.  166. 

jS*.^  (ii)  for  Jfcl  (ii)  MS.  2467,  p.  129^  bis. 

LJj^  (ii)  t-^y  obliquity  MS.  2500,  p.  42^. 

tvJ-  (v)  see  jjiJaj. 

(^jU*  (ii)  for  u-i-il  (ii)  here,  p.  a  a.  i. 

L^O  ever  here,  p.  11.  2.    Comm.  on  Prov.  xiii.  5  L»4j  Jjk*^  il.. 


ERRATA. 

Page  I  A,  line  5  (sU.^.  (JJljc^J  :  read  (sU^  <-^l«J'  ^^ 

P.  re,  II    eXjJLj  :  read  c*-JLj. 

P.  rs,  10     JaJULi :    rpnrl     !;»•.•:>, 

P.  r.,  2       k^/.  readloiJb. 

P.  iA,  19,  20  {Js.y  j^:  read^  <J^>- 

P.  V .,  14    j.!-«J  :  read     -Lao. 

P.  Ai«,  2       «  *^»/^j  :  read  »jl5^j . 

P.  av,  2       yn{<  to  be  read  twice  as  in  MS. 

P.  A  A,  9       Ix*  :   read  \'xa. 

P.  S.,  5      J^:  read  J^. 

Ibid.  20       *— ^/^  •  ^ead  <—»»*. 

P.  Sr,  I       J^j^.-wj, :  read  ^y^\^_ . 

Ibid.  20       sJU^j  :  read  isJL».!w^. 

P.  1a  n.       »jjjlj  :  read  sljJl.. 

P.  111,1     Cajlj,^!  :  read  ixJ .ill . 

P.  i  I  r,  23  U^lsr*  :  read  U^ii*. 

P.  tfi*,  15    j^  ajLo  rt  ^.  ♦  =»j  :  to  be  corrected  as  in  translation. 

P.  1 1*1,  I.    The  second  ^J^J^  is  a  copyist's  error  of  .Li,^!. 

For  the  *  Index,'  to  which  reference  is  made  in  the  notes,  substitute  '  Glossary.' 


APPENDIX. 


Page  1*,  line  13.  The  missing  words  are  supplied  in  the  translation.  Twenty- two 
years  are  given  to  Evil-Merodach  by  Jephet  in  the  passage  cited  from  his  Comm. 
on  Jeremiah  on  p.  or,  n.  4 ;  compare  too  the  calculations  on  p.  ir,  1. 16. 

P.  S,  1. 1.  The  passage  referred  to  is  in  Cod.  Brit.  Mus.  Or.  2468,  fol.  169a  and 
following : 

^bjJl  J^  ^^^  J^  j^  J^j  mr  ni2v  nniy  yt  nnr  mayJ  i_^  ^J^  J5G  d^dd 

ijL-  jj  »jl  ^^-ji  d-oLJ  aJ^  ^Jt^  D^^i'^<^  naiT  u^^  lu^  dtid  TiaT  J^  ^ 

d-aji   ^j^   elJj   (»i*Jj   rt/"^    Vj^j    rtr^    ^J"^^!)    CwJl    ^bj    731K    ^j^.    u^-J^ 

5  "iB'N  ui?  b  ijN^n  DB'^i  JLs  US^sj^lj  aJ^  i^riB'D  p''^  H^Jm  aana  J**,  j!  jLjb 

'Lio"  ^,1  ^^j  hwJl  e*^'  pJlj  nnijJl  J*^  vnc'D  p^ni  ni?on  annsn  bwn^  n!> 

eUil  Ji  »jU\  UaUj  Ujj\  ll^  lX  UJl  mr  mayj  (.^j--A^  ^r^j  J^JJ' 

^.^j   *4^^j    r^>^J    ^^^^•''    ^^*^^    v:^;^^    VntJ'D    p^DI   ^i'm    33nDD  JU  US' 
10  t_>^    <^    «^^'j    (•i/^     «yljjyar^-*^'j    cyUjJ^^I    ,», .., -c^    (*ir^      vU    (_5*   »J^lj    iJ|JL» 

pOlj   K»i2>  ^i^a  ^533  nnB«  "IB>N  npB'D  bi  D^yiB'Jl   J-xl  ^  J^  NDESJIj  *j^' 

'jn  ^3N»  b  ijKl  PM  ^NT  I^TJn  ^N1  Dn^T  fjN  1Q333  yj13  yjoJl  j^  JLs  dJji^  L4JU  Jo.lj  j^ 

tj-J     NDOJlj    *J/sr^^     UJ^    ^    U^^  i^U-Ull    ^^.    ^-    sill    IjU    Jdi    ^lp>r\ 

eyli.U-0   J^JlIjU   "inO    »^j    "^"IDN     D''1JJ1  ^^    ijl    1^^    ^^.JJI    kU    JJii    jy   U^^o 

15  eyj^    8.---JJ    .ij^j    ""^Jr*.     r^'^    u'    JW^'-*    c)-*  J>f^    ^   ^^    '^    ^    (•]/*-    ij^J    ^'''•^-1' 

i3n^i  «Jy  ^^  J  i?Db  ^{^KT  riN  criTni  nvijDJl  Jy  l^/J  ^1  ^^ij  ^  ji>  ^ 
vj-i^  innno  n3nB>3  n^b>  nm  ^^  sjI  \:.1c  nniJ^Ji  d'-di  n^3Nj"i  D'-yiTn  |o  ui? 

^jO  JJi    *J^;-»3l  ^j^.  ^  ^jlb    Jl^  Isrs^.jJl  iu>yt\  CaJ^  I^a.  ^^   D''1jJl   Ui*  ^^.  L^l 
20  *  z*-*^^  ^J^  (V  slip 3  uJJa  lj>4i  Lcjjtii   s-oLnij  cljJJb  ^IjLJi  _o\j  ^Jl  &-ix^) 


U  2 


lor  ♦  cJW>^t>  yuM  ^y^  ♦ 


1  }0N— ^yJ  om.  X.  X  adds  iT«»  yanx  *B  mjy  iNpiB^N  p3*  |«  n3y  nnp^i 
tDii'B'1  nm^  novy  D^3iy  pNi5i  na  e^y^^  |ni3  nnn  jck  63  ij>n  nn^yt  ma^jo^. 
B  adds  |N3B  "VD  HJN  DDQ  ^NyotJ'''  niai^oi'  frND  ^ipn  I3y  pa"-  iNpna^N  |K  miyi 
n:D  n^NoijN  iraa  nn^J^^i*  1^*1  ^3p  |o  n^  ^'t  ^by  ns  na^  "i  ddh^jn  nniNB' 
n3B>»  ijy  ni3^  n)b^  Nia^  ^'r  ^siriD  Dani^N  noai  riJD  ri^NO  yaoi'N  im  rh  "ikvq 


[n-3-]  u 


o 

2 


jtSj  Zj  sill  i^^  r-^^A  cr*.  uj-*^  "s-^  ^  >^^  ^i-t-^  ?«M  ''^ni  D'lnyiD  ijnD    i  r  J-aj 

iwli   -«J  8-Ul  !Uj».   (•^^/i   r;^.   ij^-^-L-x  ^~*lj   (*4^    *^   (^3    t;;-ft-^^  ■J^-^  ^^^  j-i-^  J^j 

'n  ny»i  »J^  ijl  *^  T-onn  noin  ny»i  ^y  *4iJU.j  j%^J  U^^  ^}  C^j  ^^n  Q''»^ 

yiiK^n  ^vni  U^  JU»  t^jJI  cJ-^j  eJLiJl  Jl  D^y^^ni  a^nNoi  pj^n  ^^l^I  ^Ij^I  »1a 
UU  ^;^.<Ju».  n''»^  (.4W  i^  J^^  iaJ^j  (Ji/^  j^^  J^  J^lj  J^j  i^nioi  nnr  n''n{j^> 
vj^  ^^  T'onn  noin  nyoj  vh^^  i_>J^  ^^  niND  tr^ci  n'sha  Jj«^  t^jo^l  j;^-y.WjL> 

l^-jJii  Lo  A-ir*J^  Ju-mJJj  JJ't)  J^  Ijuij  AJL«.  djLo   JO^l  ^^  8jL«-a.  ^LC  ^ib  jj.   ""JSJ^  T]''2 

^l^L  %j  ,j«-J  Lo  ^jy!,\  sis  YP  ny  J^  js^Jlc  uJju  nil  |y:jL>  ^^  j5Ci  Qninn 
d'':c'  j^j  Q''»^  ^^.  ij^  ^J\  ^y  D^ynti>  Jl5  U.  ul  pjLdl  ^^J  QHjc'  d^D^Ji  i^i«.  ^1 

PlijN  niNO  i^'i'tJ'l  D^Q^N  ^1  ^^^-^JLm,  ^jJ^jfiW  i^Jidl  »j^  ^^  ^  ^^^JlJ  loaUl  Ijui  ^ 

U^  t^jJl  Uli  plIJl  jXll  Jj  n"ki>om  CB'ii'tj'  niNo  tj^i'tj'  pi^jn^  awni  dtinoi 
\ihm  D^s^N  J«.  ^^Lcl  ^!^l  j^.  j^ij  ^  iiUl  »i4  ^j\  Jls  jwRi  ^^j^ju.  ^  J.G1 20 

«-»-^  u^^  u^  J>^'  ^  ^y.  ^ (J  j^M  (J  pyJ^  ^-«-^  u'  t^j  «^LiJl  pyJi 
U|  Ho  i^j3  Lo  ^^  Ls^  ^j     ♦  s^  jjj*  ^  y/2l'  (.^/-itjJ  ijuk)  Jj^l  py Jl 

YP  ny  ny  tinmn  D^oinm  a^Dino  ^3  s^  Jj*  Jls  jju  t-o^l  J-^^  Jis  jj  25 


^  ijna  Bj  ana  x.        ^  j^^.,  p^^^j^        3  ^,3^,  ^         4  om.  b.        «  rhba  p) 
tD^h^Ni  ^^T^N  |y  nw^  |K  yivn«  •t^'ni  navi'N  ^ndn  b. 


a  .13  W   Jjb  ^  o\  ^j^_^  8^  ^^.l  JUJ  Jj  Dnin3{J>»  ^y  imj^  JJU  d^  ^y  w.  jj^  nijni 

y^jjj  -^j  u4;^'   1:^4;   L5*  J^^  u4;  ur-s^j   ^"^l^   U^   sJ   t5JJ^  i'Nit:'''  px 

10  ^;^.  t->l^i  j^^  ^J\  fU-  ^   sJJl   jLfljLj   ellj    JljOj   ili^l-  J^^   ^""^J  e^^^^^    "^ 

lioLi  ^jSO^  POM   ppJ  JLfti   i_>lyLU  ^y^i  ,^^   »jj!c  -J      ♦  (j->*^   (^  V/^^'  ^j  aXj^I 

jjl  i.*.>w^.'^  Jtj  sJLlI   » » >p>  L«jj  ^^^^.   (j«^^j   ijL«  <-iAJj  i_aJ^I  ajL^j  julc  sJl 

sJ^ij    (»aLj^   d-«U\    j^    u.  Zj   »JJ1    JuCj   L«   ei^^    Lfljl   e*5^1  csLli   ^j    1P113 

r.iVpim  jjLJl  J-lj  noy  pn3  ^v  ^Ji3T  JjiTsj^^x^o  *4J;^_)  na^nnnp  ns  nnia  ^3s  mn 

jjI:o    As.    ^  kil  ^y.  ^Xe^Jlsrij    LlVJ!^   ^.  ^X-oljIj  U-sIjI  jJ  dLlj  *-j|Jb  (j^  aj 
20  l^-^jg  t— fli-J  ppJlj  C'lyiDJ!  sjufc  ^J   4/-^^  »J^  U  (»]Jj  A^  ^\  c?/Jj  *-t;^  "-^J-^ 

•     ^^^.-^i-.  niso  t^ijcn  eii'Ni  D^yc^ni  dtind  pi^jn  d^om  niN»  c^k^i  d^s^n  Ij^  ^r^^ 


*  Jl  v_J^l — oJl  ins.  P;  om.  cett.  "^  Perh.  u-*.*^.. 


^wot*^.   L5^-^)    ^>i    '^-^^    l^-obl    J J--C  ^  ];4^    ^J^\^J^   Llm    (^^-^-^-a    i^JLjJl    ^»Xxi  '  '  O}^^ 

3-ft^    Lo»J     ^^j  >t.g»      AJi-uJj     LskJ     AjLo     ^«J     i^wkJtjugJlj     jJLjLa*      '^^      t     8)1      ^^v-o     .  -S-J     >-*%-i 

Jji^l  !i)  y:^^!  jji  py  a^a  Jy  uj^  ^^^  ^-\^  vvn  Jy  j^-.  ^Xij  U^^^  5 
^ylo  ^j  JU».?.)  i-aLo  Ijlb   pavJl  dli*  (j-o  kj*.  JLxJI  j^  (.£^  py  j^b  ^j^oj 

».u>.»a>.    5Jt^   jUAiu    cJl31   ^_y^   p»\oj   ^__pi    ^}^-^  o>*|P^   Ljr^t^  "* 
»^vw*o  iiJ!-o  [^\  Jlc  jJj  LaXjo  li^j  D''iy')D  ny  (c*  J-a-^"  j^  t^JJl  j-*  nisnoJI 

DDIN  N'-nO  ^3Jn  8^  J-J  t5JJ\  (_^bJl  ijNItJW  Y)2\>  ^J^_  \.^y  (^>y  -^J^j  J^Jr*^   ^  •^''  ''^■'' 
^^Ui»-o  J^j^-J  U^J^J   (^  -rr^'  ^r4^   Si^\    »j^  (_5?3  IN^^    ^^313   pS^f  pNO  20 
t_ftJ^l    » JlA    ^   j%^  ^1  j^j    ri1»p3    8-^    Xj    JJl  ^;4^j    313   (jsn!   ^Ij^ll    sJlA  ^Ij 
JlsJl    Jjk\    jjic    ^r^^— Al    aJj^    ci>^   313   Jao    *o     L«^    c^^b    ^ "■  * ^j    ajLo    ViAiJ. 

^j\      viU^jJfc     ^^      IsJuS.      ^JlC     ij^      ^^^^j     A  ...  » •-».     AjI..»,  ;  L'j     UJJ^I      JSJufc     J-X^     »^L> 

♦  8. la.:;,;')  Lo^^l  L^-oj   JjjJl  ls'^^-''^  '^^  W^^  ^1  jJo  I4-J 


^  Numbers  the  same  ia  all  (B  D  P  X  Kit.) ;  to  be  corrected  from  Comm,  on  Isaiah  i. 


IM 


♦  cJW>^<^^>*^  P:/*^  * 


•  o>-^  (»Aj  lujj  ^^  urt/^"  ^J  J^"  '^^  J^  uj^^  y ^  §•  *^^  u]yi^  ij  vj^  ^ 

^ji.£wyUiv<    Lij^    t>*^^^   c3^-*^J^  (»ilt>3l   »JVjl   oi^  (^yoj   " 

Js\  jjh  ^'^n)  ^j\  sjjicj  ^^  ^  e;-:^^  >4  a^^y^»  u^  r^ls  ^-^  iJ^  jy^ 
♦  T»nn  "»Din  oJj  ^^ ^^^-^  ill  ^J-^r:^  i«J)^l  » J^  ■i«i^  *1j^.1  ^jl  J  ^^j  xjl-.  ^^ 

»Jji5  iJjjJl    vLs-»'  ^^  *^  Jju  »jl  v_jj!c  Jj^l  ^   *Ls:»  jlcU  ^  ^  ^jj  ^^ 
nnvJl  ^_5-iJiJL5[j]  [ajl-«]  y;-;Ji--jj  ^L.j   ujjl  ^_^  ^^Jl  D''10^Jl  iJJb  SA^  JuLCj  TonH 

^y  JjAjLi  cnyiD  >t**j  ny^D  ^U  dnyiD  n^b^^ih  Jaj.  jJj  ^sm  cinyiD  iyi»  sJjJ 
2onD"in  nyo  UJjij  Ids  L»  Jlc  ^^ . ; ...  &''*iyi»Jl  »!*  cujlS  li  kjI^aj  s^  U  dUi 
[^vm]  onyio  nyio  ^^  tdb*  ''JK'3  c^jb'  b'^b'I  Zc  >aW«-^  «i^^i-  ^}y  ul)  *^^^^^ 
jj^jL*.  dJ^LiJI  »ju8i  j^  a:,*.  ^j\  UjJIc  »j\  LJJj  Iju^  ^^  |,j^  to  j_j9  UiS  Ui 
nyi»JI  j4i  n^3K>  ^jK^D  mtj>  myii  J^&j^.L*  aLj  mp  nna  Jij;  U-J  u^ 

25  ij^^  u^  >*J  -'^'j  'ri/^  (J^  ci>^^  ij-:-'-^^  ^^  "^'^P  'Tl^^  ''^   '"'''^''   W^  u^^ 
B»1^B>  XaJ  Li^  c  g.fl:H  jjfel.T.t)  J^—^r^   (*!;   8^1  ^1  Jl  ^NIO  1133   nf'pJI    l^ 

"»3*i»  j^  j-oJ^--j  ij^^jj  ijl  Jl  JjL)  paxn  'li'D  (j«-*^  li^  ^  4-^  I— Lflj  ^ 


Uli  nyi5j«Jl  u:,L.iU  Ldj  sip  Di^N  DV  nnp  '•3  JyS^  u^  ^^  I^Cl^jj  j^jb^\  •  •  lij-^ 
KP  ny  ny  nnmn  D^pinni  Q^oino  ^^  JU  dJlU  ijlj^b   d^!5^2k>dJ1  I^j-Lj  u^^   — *" — 

^   iw^   I4JLC   dJi   (_5tt^   ^^l   lUuL)   i_aJai!l    Xj  s.111   (^l^j    (2]Jj>    ^J.>r^^   ^pJI    v^   >XJjti 
^_;ill    ^^Ja:il^    *W>r''   (J*  s^'    »-^   r»l>^'    cT"   r'^    i-flU    iJlil   J^    ^Jlc   j^j  5 
cyLoiUJl    ^   ey;4Jo    e*JjJl    i_j^   lilj    Jtj    sJJl    ki**'   Jo_j   j«^    Joo    j^    ^j^.s^-^j 

Lo  j_jLc  ajo,!  '  ^jjsi  ^LjI  didj  Jlc  ^LJI  *.*Ji  nnnn"'  JIj  *j    «  ju  JyLlI  (,X«i 

«!^i   u'    (J?y-^    "^'    («^    P^^l   ■^■•2^    Dm   Pinvij    JU    ijlS^JJ   wl    JU:!    _^1    Viyt 
^jji   (J!Ji   XttJLJ   Ui    JjijJlj   a^b;  Jl   »JL^  ^UaJli    man''    «JjJ    Lois    J'pJI     oJj    uj^  10 

jJ^ll  j^jJl  ([^^-yJl  jJiJ^j  U5^  nnnij  xh  niiT^  «!>  Jy  Jju^^j  v]/J'j  Jj-^I  n'.t'dt 

^J^S.^     J^i     j»4lSl     aJ^^I  j\j1,\    *4-^5j     ikjJJ     *4i     j^^-^-olJj     ^;-*-i-L^    a^^I     i_5? 
(Sll^J     Uj     *4^^^.     ^    sill  y*.*-^9    U>i^-^     ^    (jijfcl^l     ^^^.-j-JCj^     -^W^^'j     i:yj-f-Jl  ^ 

J^u>  joi  n-i3n^  Jl5  dJjJii  ^»y  ^ndh  ^d  ini»^  anna  JUj  >3  Dwisni  onnion  "  .^dS 

j_5ijdl  11*  ^_^   »J^i3  J---iJ  *j    8-^4    c^^l    eUj  ^   j_5ll  ?rb:-s^   *-^^J  ^''    *"^  ^9 
J^  3\  1-nnn^  ^4-^9  J-J  ^^  ^  ilJ,  ^^jj  *!^  nnj3  ""Dn^n  dn  ^d  ^UjjlU  Jls    23 .2  'dt 

,j^l    .^^    i:)-^^*)^    (^^    v_iUj\    »1aj     ^jAi^y;^    *^j    nniDJ    C3"'p''1V   dJ!yjl 
kbiir*  (jS^I  8-^9  c-'^ij  i-^.  |,4il»J  ^^-^^1  (JJ^l  i—Loj  ^j  13*1^1  Jl5  ^^.*_JJ1 

uj-aj  \'xsb^  ''1''  mm  jjil  ^jjjtj>^j  l4Jj5^  ^jii>  *45C.j-.«.^  n"i"ivJI  c*^  l^Ii».ju*i  Uj  25 

_/i-»  jy  (_5i-«^^  jiu^\  YsJb  j^  1^  dJj   \jL»;-ii  Uj  pi  _^W^1   j4^   )>4^    <-r>^   *4JL>. 

sJ^Si  c?Ul  ^..jiJl  ^^  nnn  ^ytno  Jl  w.  ^,-^-ij(  D^yc>i  iy^K>-ini  JLs  j    ♦  0^^5,10 


^  Perh.  bo.y  2  p3qI,j5  x.  ^  |»  P;  |)0D  B  KX. 


iFv 


<•    cJ^\l>  jJUio     ^j-J^     * 


I .  ^JJ^\^  nnvJl  db^^  o^^-^J ^  iyi"ir  i^  ytj'ini  Jy  ^j  y^jso  px  ^3  DoiriB'^i  j^^n  px  ^a 
n  .ID  '»ii3>  D^nnnn  ••"i^  iai  ij?»k>  Jpl  jjj^  JIjj  j^r-JI  lAs.  ^  dU JJ  Ur-b  sJ^iil  ^j  tJ'^N  px 

ij^  J-!-^  (*-4^^  u^^  u^  Jj-^^  j^l>*^'   »j-ij«^.  <j>^^  ^)  (.4-^  (J^*^  »y*** 

\]y^.  ^j^^^  u^'-^  j-^^^  t>^l)  (•^^W'j  Tn  '•con  j»Jkj  jirS^\  oi^^  cr'j 
^^!iUaj  oJj  ^j  niND  tri^tn  D'^a^N  (jx:v"  u'  ij^  C^  '^^.  ^y  u^r^j  ».^IiL» 

IsUl  *A;-»1  Lpa^j  >^j4^^   ^^X)  "^'^  >J^'  nnvJl  ^  j^Ul  Jli::J:,lj   J^jJl  ^j^\p 

Lo  II4J  Ll^a  kjw^  J^.  U-«  Dn-'trn  n"'B'^,-<>--,-aj  ^  »lil^  isU-,  JLc  LiU,  L»^ 
^)lc   LojI    ^».m5;>   ^43    jtj    »JD1    Jjii   ^^    »pj   L«    L«U   LJLxil    ^^    i_jI::^1    »pi 

2  0  ^^  »^\  J*  JJ>.lj  xj  sJJl  ijl  i-jj!cj  loy  ''V  pn^  ""a  Jy  ^j  CDtJ^n  li'-rxn 
^.sLi.  ^4^  i^^jio  i)  ^  jsl\  t_A*-«  ^ji  T  ni^TN  ^j-su.^  T-  n^rx  ^a  nsn^  ••a  dy^ 

^4J   lX^\.»'-',a   ^4JI^1   jjlSj   tsUi  ^/-?^j   8-MW*-   J^-»^   i«-4-ft^  u^    ^^  1^0    Uj   ^jlkJL. 

».nS3i  rbwa.  Jb  dJjJLi  nM3  N^  DiNH  na{j>  onn  D''»\n  ^jb^  ^a  J^  ^  JyiJl  u.  ^Xaj'  U^ 
26  i;;lS^U5^t>ikjj  (j,.-;^-  tjl  »U  ^^1^  Jo^y  ^^.  ^  j_jjL«j  airyi  nixy  dsn^  JLsj  t 


^  n"'ajn  codd.  ^  pgj.h.  ^^.oj*.  '  So  P;  ia"in"i  cett. 

T  2 


Li^^sb    ^*    (jfj^j^f  {^y<:iXJi,^    (j^^^^yylT  I »XajUvL5 •    l^-O/LOo*    l*.*-OL>    I.  ir  J-ai 

prnn  aino  i'N"'jn  nnxi  Jy  j_^  sJLl*  J  ^lu  U  ^j.^^  ^^^  D''oinD  ""^  JU 

i_ftjb    il     8^    ^^1    JLc    JwJ^    (sUj    ^y     LT^J     JWJ^JJ     ^    >*     f»J^"     C5JJ'     u^ 

♦  P^l  ^^  jS^^^  n^Dinm  d^dijid  L4JI  jsJ^jtJ  o^oinm  o^Dino  >:5  J  JUi  »-Jlc  5 
jj\  ,.^^-     ♦  nnin^  j^p  ny  _^  c^jJl  cuiyi  dJi  <^y>  ij!  »j;ic  J     ♦  L_i-i5oj 

Ij^   '-r^J        *   JiLajJl    ^^   i^^l    A^,a^'   Sxj,    "3]    1^^.   (j«-J    J^pJl     jjl    I— i]]I.C    8Jl    JlxJ 

JjJ    i^j-s^    cyL.^    i;^«^-a-^   i^>-^  ^■l3.>:.U    ^jj^    ^j\    JjjI^    ^-tJLj    L^ji   viA-Jb 
Ul     «  U;u3  ^^j  s^-^jlTsU-iI  ^  p  iA}\  JLxil    Uj   t3  sill  ijl   Ij.c^  (_54i 

jUj  j^oiJi  ijui  <^>  j^  w  jyji  ^.Xai-  ly^Ly  jjijui.  j^  :»!  ^-  aji  ji  ■'^•''°^' 

sJy  :>_54-Jl  ^^  p^  JU  »-^l  jjj     ♦  ijNij  ivvi?  Nni  JIjj  py  Lj^n''  N^^^  nyni  a  .•C3  'yxo^ 

ijU^l   C4-^j    lM];— J   uy^.    i)    J^    u^   ip"    '■l^''    ^^^  P^  ""^  '<"'''''  >aW«-^.   (^    V  .t:: 
^^\  sUi  ^1  U.  l>_jj^^  ^^  ^jlJ^l  ^^ysri  iju  jJ  il  L.k..=>  IIaj  °&-i,y  j^    ^^s^  17 

(*4|>^.    J>^   LT-S^    ^^   »J_)>^-«-!Jj    s-J^-^j    iliLdl   »,j^    *-b/^J    *"^   (j^.:.»iaJj     JLJl 

OV  DV    "TIINI    Jy  |_59    sJLail    i__ft.^j    ^sJ^\  j^h    Jpl    JJ/Jl    Loli   *4^_ftj^    (^   ^j     a  .TO  'r\D> 

^^^-;yj5J!      (JJ^lj      J-aiJl     ii-l-X^^J     Lo     jJlC     ^Ifijt^      .sliLlsl     aJlJj^     U,.^,.*^      ^j      *liCa.l.   25 


^  Om.  P  X.  2  ^Q  P ;  p  cett.  "  nhpl  codd. 


11*0  *  (J{^]Ly  jkjjo  ^r^  * 


^(J^^    (isUj    ^   jjj    s^b  JL«J1  Jlc   mv  jjpCJ   cu5jj    c^t^  Uj"^   J^lr*^    J^   "T*^ 

^1,  «jjt)  JlSj  1N11  N3  li'NtJ'  Di^tJ>  pNi  nna  iiyoB>  nmn  isip  »J^.  2c  _^L-y.  j4- 

J\  8j  ^^-^  «yo{j>  m-in  ^ip  Jy^  mv  nyi  ni»3  pN»  wnn  nvn  bm  '•a  '•in 

V  .-13  ■'IX  ijyiDty  n'n"'or  psn  pijdo  _jjfcU«jLj  >xl-.  Jy  ^j  JJ]^.«<^.  ^y^  j:i\  ^Li.1 

6  JL«J1  Jlc  J-,^:-tJ  mx  IIaj  nai  nnai  ins  Jy  ^j  di!?b>  pxi  ins  JlSj  pn^i? 

vs^n  bv  vy  ina  ^jd  ^h^ni  yno  Jy^  »ajo  t^JJ'  i^^UJl  ^J  dJi  ^j  y-b 

U  J\  jf^^  j^yCj  ijl  U\  ^^y  jo.1  etUj  ^j  3py^^  N\T  nnv  nyi  JU  J  m!)V3 

^^\  Ulj  ni^nj  mx  ^  teji  D^jmrJl  ^Uj  ^  J-j|/-->  Jlc  t^^.  U*  s/i  Jja 

lo  ^y  dUij  ^_^^^l  J\  D^»yn  nn»  ^^  (*^y*^  J^.  j,4iaJj„  U  Jl  w  ^;-jl>  ^^^ 

n»ni  Nri  ^  w  JyJl  *1«j  US^^jibvJI  ,^  ^^..U  t^^  U  L^jl  cyl^jl  «Ji*i> 

^jl  ^.-U  i.?^  !ut5Ci  nnvJl  ^^  *4-JLff  tc;^-  Lo  ^1  yt^  ai3  »ajoj  o^i'Nyoti'M 

!D  .r  '131  «  tJ'Nn  TT'B'i'B'n  flN  TlNnni   JU  dJi  ,_5»j  dL-Jl  jj^  ^;;-■^i--Jl   »Jui  iU* 

i6  •>  tf<>A  ^^1   iji^3  L^c)>^>^  W.   O-^*^  (•>4*^   (J^   o^Jt4**j  ^U   -^ 

py  j^  L:j>^  U^^JU|J1  ^^  ^  *iyi»JI  Juo   J   wl  ^   Uju*!  *Lj:,1  CjI^Ij  JLjo 
ny  ijj5o  j^  jo.lj  kUJl  iJ^I  »ju*  ^^ju,  nyj  pyj  nyiD  ^jl  dDij  py  j^a^  pjiyi 

tjy^    ^Ji}    ^J^    DnyiDJl    sIa    Jji    ^_^    e-iflj    J    liJl    t^^lj    >>jJ^^^    ^•^j    (j!^ 
25  JjJl5^P3N  vh)  ^....>   J  eUil  ^Jl5^^^lJ  p3N  N^  Jjj   j^ 

[11.3.]  .  T 


X;...H  sIaj  isj^.W*  U^  vfej  ^133  mpJ  j_jLo  :ii  mp  nu3  ^53  nbi  y^lj  JjiJl    "^ 
Lfc^jvl   ^.   "inp  ^^^  n?3  jLl-.  I^jl*  JJL«  il  ^^pj   ^^^-^^-i--*  t^^Lill  jlL,jj.   ^    ^^ 
»j  cIju  U  Jlc  j4i  py  2^Qi  pinyi  py  UU     ♦  !liL»l  Tina  J  jlo  ^1  _jj4,j  n^pji  5 

1^1  ji  na'ipji  11a  j^.  j-oi;-^.  \ji^'  M  ^y  u^  u^  ^b  ny  ^^^^  p^^jyi  I'^y 

L_a-oj  C^JJl   lljk  ^^l  ij^aJl  ^j  vy!))l   ^^J  py   3^21  pj^yi  py  }>pJl  i^U)   ^^  ^yLo 
jjl  s-Jui  jji  L*  (JLp  j».jo  J^j1^,^->o/  ^^^  (5^j   '-^^*^^  M/^j   I-*^  J-'*-^?.  »-^l  *^* 

lili  pJ^yJl    (^A::^    s-^J^  Jjjj;  «i^^   J^i^    (sUj   (J^'  s-^jJ    iiJ^  ^J^    dUi   Jaj  (j-Jj 
i^^4:uJ    l4^l4J    J^^L*j    ry^^    »-?    r^J^    ^-^  Sj^Slil    T\T\)ii\    uyA^ol    pjiyjl    eyj^l 

KHp  Dy  1'  ^23  nibai  ^vm  nnyiD  nyi»^  '•a  L;^  Jy  ^^  dUi  Jlxjj  nnxJI 
j^jLc  f^^^^i-^^  nnvJl  t5J^^'  p*iyJl  *1j-:^1  j^^^  ^^  c;^  *^  u^'     *  '"^^^  ^^  m-'^jn 

pjj  JbLo  (j«u^j    j»^  i-aJI    UjI   JyLll   -lib"  jJ   HIND  {J'^tJ^l  n'^Sibn    UU  pjnyJl    cl^i  15 

nnvJi  j.jjj  u'  ^  elli  ^_59  v^^lj  UJjl  ^^  Jj  t^np  pnvji  U^l^  ^J\  v-jji^j 

0^:^)1    Jl    ^\y^J    ^^„J    ^_5iii;j    ni3D    v/sr^.    (jlll    dill    11a     ^^    J-jj/-«->    J^ 

^_y4:L:-«.  ^j  nD2i  '•nt^'n  nan^ni  ainn  i^k'sji  isx»lj  ij--  l^^  niNo  ki^^j^i  d''21?n 
nriN  n»N  n^JK^ni  1^  _jjfc  K>np  pnvji  sJ_^j  ti^np  pnv:i  niN»  mbm  d^2^xJ1  xIa 

*^  ^l^  j^  U-ojtj  niN»  mbm  n^shii}]  11*  jjl  m  ^^.j  Q^»yn  "i2n»  ^^ 
lanD  Jl  J^j];-o  c^r*^-  1.4^  ^^  PV  a^ai  piyi  py  i^^-.  U^^^.j  D^ynrJl 
D^2^N  ^jlj  pjnyJl  J^  mnn  i^jc^aji  ^^1  ^^1^1  ^^-  juSi  JyJl  w  ^laj  UTD^oyn 
py  ib^)  pjnyi  py  il^  ^y  U.-^^^  n^ynrJl  ^4;  J  uj^.  U-^^.  hind  c'l^tj'i 
jjj  ^j  x*lj  ^^>^  J^  J^  ]^ii^  ^^1^  ^ij  oJj  ]iv  u'  ^^  JyiJl  («3jj-  jjj  25 
U5^  n^DDH  noin  nyoi  J^  oJj  <wl>  j^  ^^;  cfjJlj  iiU  ^^^^  ^^^ji  ji^j 
Dy  T"  |>23  ni^aai  Jy^     ♦  nanon  ntrx  dJj  jjo  j^jji^  i^^^Ju  ^  dL)  •> 


CJ^^ 


^  nhp  X.  2  f^^,  p.  j2^^  cett.  3  p,  go^j^  4  pj^^pj^  j^^^^  p^ 

8  I^DDBDK.  «  Perh.  JU^.t.).. 


I  r  J-Ai  nis^an  sIaj  niN^an  p  tio  ny  JL~j    « »^  !^  JW^^-^  t/^  p  ^\  »«-^  UjIj 

"^^       pmn  ^n»  iy  J  JU;   (^Ul  Jj^i  JJLJJ  j>j^  ij.Wl^  U^.^^  U^'j^   u^- 

5  Uilj  prnn  didd  ^jx^^t  nnxi  JLjIjJ  J^J4  (jjJPjLJl  JU:  u-iaj  i^^l  ^J!i)  eUi 

13 .13  'oT  «  ^nan  ^od  "•nyaB'j  >jjn  J^jij  sj!  l^"  ill  Ujl-  Jo*!  ,_^  i^JojJl  ^^;-tw^l  j_ykj  "-v 

B'  .1  'Nil  U,JliJ  ^;1  jjsr^   J.  nyia  'n    ,.>i   sj-Ji  *-,\  J.^j  jJ.  ''i"'  ""n  s-UiX  ""nn   ^3»i 
V  .in  'Nil  ,  ^  •      r  _^  —       1 

^^\  (j^j  ^1  j^  1 .  a :  o  (j^  nv  3^31  P'JS'i  py  »Jy  »■«  >-■'  llftj  ''xm  DnyiD 

T.v  n''3B^  "'JB'J  njtr  niyn  ^U)!*  tsb'  '•je^d  d^jb>  b'^b'3  '•i''  nm  nnyi  3  j.AUxJi.j 

'  2 1  c'np  pivii  niKo  in^en  d^s^n  ipa  my  ny  («->^^^  py  "iv  nnu  pnn^n^i  tj>3U3L 

DnyiD  nyioij  ""a  ^j^ol^JL  d*»^  nnni  uy'a  r\2rby\  annn  li'B'DJi  o.**^lsJL 

D^winJl  ^j  ^3i>  sh  hb^r^rh  iB^npo  ^jn  sni  !:-«  UJjli  U^lj  UJjl  Us^  xii 

25  Uil    JjJLll    »J    *jJu    US    □'•ynrJl    ^y>.L^    ^^*-j    ^    J>L^.    u^    uj-^-;'.    tfJJi 
iXjtW  JJls  ^r^^jj  3K10  ^Isj   c-fl-E~^  jjl  ja  &^  j^-oJiJlj  2Nin  ^u^  n^pji  Li/>lj 


^  l^nh  codd.         «  Ins.  P;  om.  cett.  ^  Perh.  Jjaj  jJI  c5/i'  ^1.  *  Ins.  D; 

om.  cett. 


eJmi  JLx  *^  Xa.1  (sJLlJij^^l  sj.Wj  JWjl-i  LT-^  tj*   ^-'^  »-*j>.L^  JjLj  j^l^l 
%SJt    ^    {S^j    sil  dJi    J.j;j:  «-*^   '^  ^r^    '^    u^    "— Lr^  '^'^'^   ''^^   ^iittna 

^>-^i  cJ'4i  lJ4>3!  TJ^^^ijm  '»^l<>il^  c-)Iaa3!  oul^aLo  .^CUJ  Jlii  1 
e>»5   J^  u^  yi>c>Jl   (^5=^   (-vla-j   *U^!  ^1   sJUJu.   jUa^.  ^4  15 

^)j  jL^„  jj  (jjji  j^yi  s^iij  ^y  ^1  J'^  ^j  1*4^1  |ji*i  jjj  -c^v^  ^^:^i 

C^    (^    U^^    JIj     vW"     S^W^    ^-^^    p^-*-*"    J^   JW^^-i    '-r*-^^"^  *  J^   »->~Jj-^  jA 
jj   8Jlj    *U.l   Jji    *1^1   ^^    i_iilj    ^iTsJl    Ll4^    ^^j   i_islj^,-v^l  d^   u^u' 


ipinNycodd.  2  pan  BKP;   JDSn  DX.  "  pgj.ij j^^  *  Perh. 

JLib  Jlc  »_y-a^J.  ^  yO  codd. 


u«i  *  (^V>o'l>  Jtyo  ^y^  * 


jjlS^U  »Jl  ellij^l  ^y:.^lft";>  ilj  elJ  J-J  JJ»  Uj  ^Xa  (sb.\^  j»::i.l  ^yJ^_  laon 

5  JUj   Jy   j^    jj    sil  vi;;l«i   <Dinn>    JUi  °^1   J^l   ^_5»'   ^Jl  Ui..iS^_   i^\  jy^~ 

^^jj>.  ^^  j5^  ^jJ4i>^  J^  j*^  u_Li^.  ^'  »ji  Le,>^  rp  3^y  ''v  jvs  jj  «  j 

^JikJ   ^^Ijjgi   ^^yy^  V^c)^\    ^;^,^4*J   es^    uj^-    H>^^    ^^J    r^'  L?^^j" 

ijL«j\  ^u,  u^y^'  '^-^  ^  J^iy^rftJ^  »^^  [5  »^'  M^ty]  (-^' 

y  .n   jIBVDl  D"'ny  D^O  iy31  Jyj  p  u-^U  j.!-   dJi  ^^  ^j   *Ui«Jl  ^^  ^JJ-JJc^ 
II  uJlkU    j,4:Jp.    J.J^    p4^    ^    sill    e-ft-i>5o    (sUi   -V^.j    ^j^^    Jjl    ^5*    ciJ^-    '"'^J 

isTPn  T'*^  ^"'''  ■'^'''''^  sJ^J^ZJ  UJi  JjJi   ^^  ,jLs:LaJlj  yiaJlj    <^a^\j   ^1    eUi    ^J-^'J 

jy  Jju  J.JULJ1  vL^^   Jy  u^   J^  J-^"  W^/^J   vkj^^'   "^   ^J^V  b 
^J^  u_i^"  i;jl  j^  o-^  y^j  Vy  ^.  J*^!r*^  \jSdA\  ^^111  is^j  i^>^l 

^JU-'^  frA^    *W^^1   'LiJ^   J^JlftJl  u:^j  t-ftJii.  Jl  L?S>!   »-J^  ^i*^'   ^^   ^  idJl 

j.4j^j  ii^jll  »-^jC  i^Ul  ^yti,li  ^"  aJI  ^^  ^jliil  jS^ub  "i^o^n^l^  "^^■'^ 
20  li-b   >tJ  sDlj   *4J^    LJlko  jJ:,!    ^jj\  j4i   jJwaJb  ^  &DI  v^  (.s^^  v-^J   cA 

♦     &jl.i-«l    lJ^J    *"*^    K-i*'    (_j-» 

U4A  ts^^U^  c>^i*^  iy^j^'^  c>^b5^'  ^c>^  JW^^^  ^^  ^J^J  * 


1  Perh.  ^y.  2  hp  >D  K  P;  perh.y^  ^pJi  ^.  =>  d!?  codd.  *  Om.  D  P  X; 

imb  PlP^  B ;  text  K.         ^  n^Nt31  D  X.         «  Cl^B^B  X.         '  br  codd.         8  ]»2i6K2 
etc.  PX.         »  Ins.  K;  om.  cett. 


Aj».Lj^^   jjl   >— ^^       ♦^^-jiJI   ^j-»   ^»jij   ^jjt   ^   ^yja    Ijui.   d-0^1    ^    ^J-^  ij^  i'yS\j  5 
(_5^_>-»  '^-s-*'  *-»j  lM-"  isUij  j%f.hg  (jfl...'. '0 1  iJ  ^Jl  j-ftj  A<^^  cir  J-^  oy^  f'^J^i 

1^1       dlli      /«^J4      (J^J       (•-H;-*'      JV^^^^^J      (*J      *^^      ^^,.  ...XJ>      .^      Ijukj      j»^L»^ll      !i-J^ 

^jJUi  pyo  i^{5>n   D'-nm  d>m3J1  ^  »J^  ^^   ^Jir^i^l  ljj_^^  ^1  ^xJ   D^in  i  .1  'n^q 
s-Ju:  »^^  »-<j1^1j  ^^3k^d  11  *LLi.  j-aiJl  Ijuk  ^y  j^jj  ^2)}  pHV  p^nv^  inyii  nny 

cr**   U^/^-    i.?^    *-^    U>»-^*4j    u-J-ii-Ji    x,U-ffj    i'KIti'''    nyiC"    *4^_jJ    u^    Jj^    (%4Jt-» 
r'j    iji^iJ-"^    i^i;-ailj    S^-i'Jlj    J^^.   p4J^-M^    ^>?;))    r»4Jl^*^    Ijii*!^    eyUyll    ^.Jutjq 


^  rihsai  codd.  ^  p^-,  g^^j^  3  QnnK^n*  P  X.  *  Perh.  s^^ojl*  or  x^y.-.-;.^. 


r  j^U    jj^^_,  i^^i.  ^,4jJl  (_^!^j  e.. .....1!  ^^  u^^^b  D'-yenJl  ^^^Ja  t_;.Uc  ^^  iijui^l 

^j-»  iJajJl    *-5  '^.   ^  (5»  lIj"''^    (^       *  "^    *Lfl-AJl    i)    JOj-0    CytJ'^.H    \-AjiA  ^)^^  ijl    ^.*»-_jJ 

^  ^^^15.J>\  ^^,_s-J^\il  u  i^l  ;j--Jj  s^Us  Jl£  &j|  -lay  riDnx  ^jij'^d  Jy;  ^J\  11a 

»J    ^O    liJ^   J4/^»'   &J    "ij^   JWjI-^     *;^    L?m    ptnJI    ijO    li   sil  f^J-''-*^^    (J-*J    yaUi 

L.  Jlc  Kin  n»N  'iji  nN"i»i  J  Jls  'i3i  nixo  an^tj'i  D^si'N  Jy  JP  'U.  Uj  J^jIj 
15  yklt  Jlc  J-fl^l  Ijufc  J5^  ^i3  TijK  nos  nnyi  J-^1  11*  ^x^  ^  JU  dJlS^  »U»/:. 

Ij^  (jUl  oJIl  cslJl^  n''»iiiJ'Jl  jJj  U*l  p  JJl  ijl  li;l-;i>-l  ^_5»  IIaj  Ll^j  U  Jl£ 
JJl  »j.«-o  U  Lojl  jjlS^  JU*  (sUi  ;j«Jj  l£^  jj  11a  J^  IjU  ytj'-'ijN  niovyj 
^jl^D^iy  iiNniij  nisnni'  Hi's  *4-j  JU  Uj  1ij  J^V-^  Lsi?-*  *-'^'  cr*  J^J  J* 

11a  ^  oj^arJ^^liJ  ^^  jj  ;j-.J  ^jU  HK'in  pNi  D^t^nn  D'DK>  nxni  jjl^  dUij 

13  .o  'r«'  ^J^^2  ny  JjJb  vyJ  ^;--^_  <2lJi  Jlj  i^^j  03'^'y  ^^"'^  ^^^  »V^  ut'^!^  '^-^^ 

r  .T  av«    U   jJLe    ^jj5Cl   ,_£^1    iL.lSl  J^   j^Ul    Ji"  JJ^   ^j/"   J^  ^M^  ^^V'   ^<^   O^Oti' 

T  .T  ^_jj^  i-lsl  Uli  ivv^  N^  Q^OK*  ^n^3  ny  JU  dJlii  i^p\^  'U-Jl  ^  dJi  ^i-j^ 

26  »-Ju:j^    ^jl  J^jjr^.   J   il   ^^1   tsUi  ^^   sljpj   i—jPi?  Ixfti  ellj  J-^J'   ^^^  J-Jj^*.^ 

♦  Jy  Ji^^lj  ^J 

*  n^Q  B  KX;  22^3  P.        «  j^qLjL,^^  p.   j^^^t,^  x ;   DNQ^N^'N  B  K.         =>  \>\\>  ^^JN  Pj 
^JIp^N  cett.  *  p2piy»^N1  X. 

S  2 


II 

"•DVD    Q"'ini    !iJ^   JjLo    *4^   JLs   j_£^l    ^^  j^  ^^JLi   ^jL*jJl    dJj   ^y   ^\    v-ipJ         5 

^y  laUj    Uls^    jJj    l^^ir)^  ^^    Uilj  j^jil   J5^^JJ-6^    (j^    jl    D'tlHTlD    pXH    v  .n 'nc« 

j^  dJj  ^^  up9  UjI  UJl5C5j  A--lj   ^^.  Zc  J^j;^-  js^  ^  ^v  n^  '•^y  nn\T  i", 
^jl  i-iJlj^J  ^y^l  LoUb  _^.  J  -jDy  ta^c  N^^^  nyni  Jyu  aJ;!1i)I  ^!)Lsr^.  ^^. 

i_jLjj     f^jiuo^    (j-^»~».^    ""W^^^     *-*-3    »jl    USj    _^1    uj^la:?    U.;^.«j>.    j_^1j    'W*^^  '° 

_^LjtJtJ!  j.^^  Jl5  dJjJj  i-ljjJl  ^yj-«  JU.  11a  (j^^  "iJmpn  mixi  iJTiin^y  v^y 
^^ui^l  J  ^^  nay  nons  ^J^rs  U4^  Jy  Jjl*  ijjii  1^f^p^  JU  J  ^no  rn^  I>  b'  /a 
nisnn^  n^xi  D^y  ^^n^  n^x  JjJiJ  L«^»^  ^^^1^  U^^j  aJ::))!  *Ls^^  J^^s 
D^j^^^NH  ^-"021  ixm  Jyi^^  x^  ^1  ^  re  jjtl..T.^.>  j.^  dJj  ^  J^j  psmh 

^Lj^I  ijj^;.*j«j  yiT^li)  (sUii  niainJl  UU  ohy  pxm^  nis^n^  jy^     «  ^JyjJl 
S.U1  e./^.  ^^j  *^l  ^^  i!^^L)  Jjj  Lo  ^Ji£  ^^^.^^.♦^l  ^^ .  ^j » 4.U  ^^^j^.M->sr^'  i!i^l 
'HNU^j  -yhv  ^3  B>a3  iy  d'-d  iNn  ^3  DNni'N  ^jy^B'in  J-^i  ^  JLJl  °(^  JU  U^^  20 
^^jlSlj  lyl5G  '1J1  ^n^  nn^K'  nain  pK'  ^B'ln^  mnxi  n^nxi  '•jnbx  ^rr-n  nxjp  ^3  nann  n  .tqd  '^nn 

ntStiTl   7N    sJjiJ   (£l! J    ^^  ^3"  sJJl   liLftJ   Jjj   r/^b   "^dA^^-    r^^)   L5'^^J   C)>?/^J    ^  •"  '^"1^ 

inD>  noyr  on^^y  ^^tr  niNno  o.TJ^y  mat^nn  na!?  n.Tja!?  wn^^  \t  Jyi^  J^^l  35 


^  nNna  k  p  ;  nxna^K  cett.        ^  q-j^^^  p  x.        3  /,pL,  g^dd.        *  ^a  nN>f  ko 

only  B  ;  ^a  HND  |D  |N  only  K  P  X.  ^  |y  ^Np  ND3  B  K  ;  ''a  'p3  P  X. 


^^          »J   (^jJl   *4-:j^   li^/^.    u-LJl    t_JUaJ   ^,.ft-»j>.L>  ^^    dJi-o    D''1C*"lpD    liJ    Jj    (^jA*J    >i-« 
JiJLc  J  la ;  ".<>  t_fl.,...H   *4-lvO    >uL*i  I i*^lj   ^1  j^^  jf^  1 « T  ..<  ^  AJLw  djLo  jo.l  4^ 

^JiLa.J:u^J  ^J\sL}\  «_^j  ^.....11  ^1  ^^-UJl  ^  JL^  ilj  HV^WI  ni^a  "^xj  dJi  jLjL*i 

10  nrnn  nn^nj  n^  ik'n  mx  ny  nnNii  Jyj  ^^--i^  Jl^iH  »1a  jlj  D^oyn  nmo  J\ 

-    JyJ    j,4^J>   J-:^   <Jj>.>    l^i^"^^    ^^<]    li    W>*   UJ^    ^^y^    ^^    ^J  .^K-XJ^ 

nj  .w  'qt  aina  Nxoin  b  i^v  d^c  N\nn  nyni  JlSj  nanni?  tt"  |di  JlSj  ^ny  naino  inx 

v.3.2.n"n   li?  "^Xn  2^)   JlS   »J^   oJ^I   ^'''^^  .L5»   V:>^   (^    *^"^^    J^ir--J  jl^^^    ^jT^^    V^   Uj^ 
■j.nSai    dlU    u,^    jJ    ^^j    Jb    vlJ    ^^    ^jU    ^1N^ro1   ni?    Ilfn    JUj    ^'NIB'^    M^JN    ^V   ^N 

'.oDiny  ^3  JU  taUlli  ""oy  '•NDn  ^3  ini»^  mnn  J^iS  ^'  JJI  e^libj  JjljJI  j^o  cj^b 

>.nD'sic>     4  jy  jjt^  ^js^  nnina  mn  D^ycnJ!  JUil  ^  JU»  »jl  A^\^  iBoa  iina  nvdjh 

20  73  b-^   Jy  ^jjSii  ^J\  jy^.  ,j«-Jj   ^v  ''iSt?   jnat  nsD   ana^i   e;-i-t^l  Jbiil 

^^1  jLc  dLli  jjj  }vx  ni:3  nsix  nx  ^v  j^m  dk  dUi  jlo  Jb^  'UJJ  »_.j^l 

(%-»^^   er^.   u^  c/*^     *  L^'^'j    ^L-^!^l  (^   (— py? ;.)  jJ   (jjJl  ja   *UJJ  v>^i 

35  sXUl  D''Dyn    "ai»  Jl  ^^bJI    *-•    ^^j    **^1    •>-->   ^-ai:^.    (J    i;;-«j    «-«--«-Jb   u_fi.b" 


^  pimrr'aPX.  ^  Perh.^^^JLXJl.  '  Ponly;  om.  cett. 

*  tD3D  B  X. 

[II.  3.]  S 


^iU.^  cy^    I^Ua)  ^^    |J   ^^x31   TJjUi    e>»j   e/^^   i^yj  ^^^  ^^i^  s 

L4.ii  J  A     *     *2  iiLij^i    ^    ^^  ^^   ^^3>  oj^    l^^i  ^j^j^,  j^    ^^    pj^ 
^JlU   Lo  j^^   dJLJ.1  ^^jLkJ   I » a..v-vl   ^  f .  ..t,  1  sJ^.j     ♦  (__i<ajj  i:;-*-*--"  »>iA-LS  ^  ii!!L«  10 

«  iSTj!!!!  ^   ^]L£.  sil  Jlc  dJi   JJJ    i^nM    "itJ'n    uil    llja.    Li:>]jj    D3"lB>  JU  J.5J 

a^*  ^^.  ^  ji.  tj\  J^  JJi  ^n^-IJ  n^  ik>n  Jl5  J  nnv  ny  ^n^^J1   Jy  ^_^j 

_jisrJ    j_^    sJ!))    JIjJI  J)    8 : a.   ^^    ^^    J    sil    !sj    Jo^    j_^j    HJ^SH   in    ^J^ 

i-JUa-o    dJJjj    jJLrJI   ^y   ^j^j^  ySb    Lo  ^L-jj     -ai   jl   u^;-*    J^   ^J    3^    *— ^-^-^    s^    P>»-  15 

b^    »^    eUJij)    ljj4J  dJL   L.^   N''3Jn  ii^   s^js^yJ:.  jJ   L«  ^Jl  s.^   A-aiJl  UjIj 
"iian  "-ij  inn2i  J_^j  '121  N^iji  n^v^  ub^  pN  onn  DTiyni  ii^  JUi  p^  ^^i  n.i2.2n"i 
iji  tjj-JLisj  cynr Jl  t^l  jjj.  nnvJl  »!*  J-*l_j    ♦  'ui  Q^D\n  ^js^  ^3  b^  JLi^  'ui       ^  .n 
^^  D'^aJinJl  u_jJi-U-i  *4-il  *j  'Uiai-ll   JU  Lo  ^Js.  JjL>    ,j-<,  i-iLoJl  dJu   ^jjJi».L  20 
j^4j.o  ^xJUs  ninn  ^'»,  ^j   uj^^.3  "^^  U^.   ,0^  "^^i;^  (_5^^  ni3D  ^y  i\^\ 

p_jj  j%-4-^   V^j  ^-»ii^-g   aAilLo   ^4^  uj-'^J    Cl''y'nrJl   j,4-4-^    ci5/4^^»-:^--^j   eJ-yJl 

^  J^  f^j/*  ^r-^—j  J-^l^  u-a.*.-Jl  ^^  (^jj/*  ^  is^i  JJ-9  JyJl  j»Ujj  mj 


»  Perh.  JJb   Jj.  ^  pgj.jj^  ^jj  ^^^  s  Qm.  B  K  Kit.  *  nDJJ  |0  Kit. 


IPO  ♦    ^Ia>1l>     JUk>     T'-j^    * 

t_,.w=^Ls  jjfc    (jjjl   Jo   c>.s=^  (^1   jjIjJlJI    i—ftiJ    lij.-^   Uilj  dlill  (^^^-;/^  liJ  o-t-ij 
cLwaJlj  ijaII  [^^]yL^  Jl  ^,-j^  i^tj'^^  Jy^     *  ^3vn  ps3  N31  ^ji{  bir\^^ 

DHN^^  1TD  ID^D^  n^NI  JU   j»5      ♦^^^  J*U'  J^t^J^    ^Nlty'  PN  ^y  t/J^ 

ijl^  yu  dJi  ^  ,_..-j--Jl  ^.1  ^j  j^lj  poy  ^jn  .-i/jj  nxiOj   t^r^l  J-*-  j^j 

^     »_;l5J      v-i-oj     J-^.b      ^v;-*    r*^^^.      ^;^jJkJ'      SJ^     e/^      (^     ""^      ' — ijt-^     \-^-i-Si     »-fl-Lsr' 

T  .V  V  mic'  ^jso  i?D^  ">nD  "-in  2Nia  '•m:  ^3  nir  nxio  px  ^  JjJlS'  L^^Jl  J-j];--j 
u^  ^y.  n'^2  -laitr  lypn  v^^  Jj^j  <2l^l  'J^  J^  ^  U^^  Ij;-^  ^^  ^y  i^z* 
Jj  LajJ  dJdl  J-»^  »J^  ^;-a-o  i^^i  ^1 J^  sjl  *— i/^j     *  u>^^^  cy  u>i>^  J^J^r*-^ 

Xa.    jJl      ,-a-o    J-»-C     ijl^j    ^y     Jj-<i^    JuO      »Jl     ^-jj^    ini7n2''    HiyiDti'l     Jji^         ♦    Lfljl 

i'NIB''   pN   j_5!l  A^JIJI   ^^   J-Jir**^   J>»->   i_5*J*   PS^DI    mrOO^Li^l   »J    J-aij   i-J^iJl 

l^Ji     ♦  iliJl   pUJj  )v^3  -laijr  lypn  p^  J]^  ^^j  jy„  JU»  L.  i^btaj^  ^^^.^ 
25  -s— Ij  ^y*  ^J  ^J^j  ^"'P'^  *ir*-  LS*  ^*-^  "^^  «-M^   ^V  C^-J'  u-^'  c^^J  ^^-^' 

^— 2-^-    (_^  '\j^^    ».»._5    (Ju:    ^^  (_yJLo    ,j9-?J}    j,4^  UJ^J-*^    "Z*"^.    »y^>---*    l2J-U-^9 

^  xp^^  P  X.  '  i>nNiD  X.  ^  niynn^  x.  *  ini  codd. 


djo,i)  siCL  *--JiJlj  jXiSL.y\  ^j^  Joo  ajjn  n!?o_j   iiDvn  ^i'D  JU  UjI^  i-^J^j--i5 
dJLo  ijlT  jAi  jisvn  ^!5»  njin  n!?o  Jyb  ^Ui  ninn  ynnx^  ynn)  Jyi^  »1^^ 

n^'Dj     paVn    i?D    M    Jj-aJ    i;;--sr5   ^ly  pBV    Ul^    2J3    Ul    uyLftil    j^l   ^    3L3)i  5 

^^  44^  Jl  !i-j--4  u'  j^  [^  nnyjDj  nnTDj   pa^  ^^j  2::  ^^  li.1  jj»  ilj  njM 
ibD  ^jl  v^p:i  'ji'm  imna  nc^yi  Jj-lS^s/^  ^li^dl  Jl^r-^.  icv  njin^  Jls  dJjJj 

^y  nain  i^jd  s^j  Q^ansm  aann  s-^sl^  pavJl  dLL«  ^^l  s^  '^^l?  Q^tJ^nsni  nana 
Ij^Ijlxj  ^^JCU1  ^^l  Jyj    lI5Ci  323n  i^Di   psvn  n^Jo  ^1  U^^^^   ;;;^^1  Jlc 

t^J^   j^\   ^^   Jy    ^   dJi    j»isJ   llkl     2c   J^Jl^    Jy    j_^    U^jI     Jutj     Jj   ii.JU:  15 

^p\  p^V3  nai{j>  lypn  j^yi  Jj^  i^dS  ^  &il  dUi^  j^!^  JI^lj  ^^.  Jljj  Jy  ^^ 

*  ai2  jJlc  J_jJLo  tiJLiJlj   dJi  ujXj  u-fi-p  dJ  ^;.^  liyij  D3''f'y?D  p'lnnx  '•Jiavn        3 .3 
^LlTyii^jJj  pavJl  ^^  J.4,  t^LIc  jJj  j^   iljoLo  ^^1     1^:^)1  ^^^L^  ^^,1  Ac]  20 
D^JjnrJl    *!>|^    e^^LJ  1)    ;j*.Ji   di^JJi  u-Wff  Jjj   («-»   jv4J  ^yUo  li_54i  J-^^l   ^_^ 
^^^^.JlxJCj  dJi    .X-^-xi   *4^  J-:^.  &lxJj   x-aljJ    -RiA-iJj   ^\XxJ  ^JLcl    jJuJl   dJi   li-1   ^J^ 

4^!l!)l   e*-j;J  Ui    Ij^Ls  JjL>  ^1   ^j^^j  »-»^>^  cr*  ]y^'^^  cfJJl  (.jiJl   J--9   j^ 

^jj^*"r^  ^r4r^  ^i-Jl  j%-l-j"  ^JZ■^  j»-4-^  (^=>-  UU^liJl  1»1  ^^^-Jiiaj  *4j!y  ut^Ti''  x^  nnn  25 
Nni  Jjjj     ♦  pavHD  vbv  nyn^^i  b-^Jj.'  Jyj  ^^_  l^JU  ^^.j^Ls  lUi  ij^^^ 
i_^l  ^jjqj  u-W«Jl  J*^  ^;/-»  »l^l  (^JJl  dli.1  J^^^  j_59  Ji.j^  ij>  j\j  inyi  ciDtj'n 

1  Perh.  ls'3dl. 


I'r  Jj-*U 


tf^^y^y   'i.A.4-^^     'is.^sO*    C_VL5t)i«    CfjjiJl    (^v**    ifyiU^oJi.  ^V\i^\^    ff 
^^^^\^  Owt>.i3l    (J^==0    o-^^jsvJl    CHV?^    »^jjl*    O^IjO/o    (jLw^i^  I'd 

30^  jJbj  j^l  psvn  n^JD  ^^  jLj  J  yIII5)i7"lLlJl  ^4^  j^lj  pa^D  nn^m 

^Uij    njno   ^JDK'Dni   ni^K'n   Jy-T  slb-bj    J.b    jJb     -iAj   v^\yy\    ^b^  X»  Ji^ 

8-sJLc  pa^fn  nijDi  ajjn  i^d  j^ji^l  ^j.SlX\   ^^ju*  a^  JUsl  ^^^l  liU    *  JyJ\ 

15  i-oLkjl     ,j  .  » 1 ...  Vl     ij-«-5     ^J^*     J^li    ey^     eyLats.     ^.     LjLeJ     ^j    DJJH    ^/D     Jjti 

^^  si^i  icy  njjn*  23 jn  i^o  ^j  JLsi  ♦  ^y-  j^o  »jl«  ^^  Jii  psvn  n^»  L«lj 
v^  ^^  ^jfi  »J^  v^y  nynt^i  psvn  n^D  ^y  Jl5j    ♦  ^Ldl  v^    *    *    *'  »jl« 

C^  ly  ^P^  (^'  eUU-0  xjj^]  ISA  ^\  JL«j  ^^\  ^^^  «  a4->jlH  xX*  ilj^l  ^jl^ 
»^L>  jJLsJI  <2lL.  ^^j  JLxJl  elL.  Jj!^!  dJLHj  ^...b:>  JUib  ^Lu  ^y^  ^^U ji._^ 
(sli-»  sJjJJT  \4^  »-*-^  ^_^^  A-ojJil  ^1  >_-^-«-4  J^  th  M^  uj-^  ^4^  (J^  "-T--^*^  ^ 


^  Dayjn  codd.         ^  Qj^^g  j^  ^  nnnn  D^nyt^'n  nyB>.         ^  Perh.  add  ^^  ^.. 

n^X  codd. 


onyoJl  '^ii^^J  ^jl^  in^  nnn""  n'-^''  -ijj>x  JUi  ^^.^^^  J-*jo  ^j!  ^^Ij.  r^j  onyD       " 

^y    l^iJLii-J    ^^^l    ^   1^3     ni7N   Dy    sJ^iJ    lU    J^    ^  ^1    (_j>^Xo   jl  ^1    .>j-;jt^  5 
[U]    ^LJ^I    iiU  ^ij       ♦^^l     (^.    ^j    >Xa.l^l    .Sj-otil    Xiyi    (sUil     lJ4i    *4JjLii 

xiiij  Jl^^l  ^i;-*  i-^\  »-^^.  ^-^  j^j  'Ti^^  n^T"  ub^^^i  i^Jj-Sj.  Jy^  c/*  (*-•  ^  i'^-* »■> 
JjJlS   cLkfll  i-iJajtj    eJ^^^    dWom    Jy-S^  ^JlJJLJl   ^J^    »^b   (^"iUJL 

n"'"ii   ""^ty  (SU4J  (^jJl   Ijuiij   !i_jJiJv-o  |j  ly^^j   *4-;JiJL-o  1^5^  (*4-J^  o*^'  i*^  ^° 

(J     (J-*J   ^lA^    ""^   (J^    A;^    8-j-ftJ-6    (^    Ji.j    oH»   Jj    u^    UV    (^^    '^■15   ^"^P 

UjJLe  J^2r*o  LoU  LajJ  Sr^^i  i4i».  ^y  aJJI^I  ^^  JLc  —^  jJ  ^^1  ^Ij  dJLll  IXa 

\^ys^-    7N15J'''    ""Jn    u-^A-a     ^^J>.a.-;.3t^    ,_;-IjJI     ^jlS     (y^-*-«   (cJj  ^>n.»a     sJIjI    jsJJI  ^-^1 

♦  J^yo  JjJ  ^j}\  6S'uX\  y^ yt^  j^\  (slL.  dLiil 

*  p^Dji;  ^n  e>^  n^i')DJ  «|^!  ^f^^.  ^^  e>Ux:i 


'  ^D  X  ;  |D  cett.  '  nt3Wn^  K  D. 

Line  8.  x^-»»j. 


M  J-ai  dJ^iUli  J  J^j     *  D^^N  i'K^  t^  olj^-j.-.  J\  »-)  ^,.^A>  J^UJ^j  D^n^xn  M^K 
ri  j_j-.l9  ni^xh   kJ^j  yt^   U-4-^  W^  cri^b   ^-*-^  (^^j   W  oJ^.   !1>I   sJl  U-t-* 

ixi?  p^»i  -.juJ  U  ^_59  sJj^  t-***^  cr*  ^W*^^.  r*J^^  J^  ^b  *'*-^"^-  -^  j^  »«>-^i 

5  «^^jk  ^j  ^Ul  ^iJ:  ^  JUj  xoo  Jjb  jjj  nia^  nnyro  m^N   ^y  Jy^  '121 

J5CI3  »jJC)  ^j  J^  (jJUJ  ijU:  ^^4^^  »jl  »-i  v/J  t^JJ^  r^'  N^  cH-l?-^*^^ 

»j.a:ljo  Uj  *4J^  ^^  rJr^^  ^*-*  '^•^  -^-^^  ''^^  t/*  u^u^J>?^  ^  ^-  '^•' 

^y  Jlsj    Jjjb   Ij^sJl    LijJ   8-;jfcX»    ^^^U^^ill  Ijuk   jjx    ^jl5   ^^1j    ^.^.i-o  ^^4^ 

j^jdl  ^J.xsW  cu^.  o  jo^  D^y'j  nn»n  i^yi  Jy^     «  o^^  ^^t;^-  (s^^j  [^*>^ 

t5JJ1  A-«>VI  J.ii:;....^  Up.JJL«o  Jo  iJuiJI  ^j^"  J^  JJajl  »i\  °(.-*^b   ,^L:J1'  U.Vt^) 
15  Ul  u>?*^    t5JJl    Ow^l    u.    ^1;^1    uj^  y^^^    <^'^^   J^    U^  ub    ^*  U^-?^- 

men  byi  JU  csUJJj  ^jvl/^  ^j  ijy^\  »!*  u.>^  ix^uU  J^yJl  'L-^l  x^  sJ^ 
♦  ^U.  j^j-ot^  [^y]  »Jl  Jii:  JaJ  ni^JN  b  i?yi  J-Jj  vnuN  m^k  ijyi  j^o  ': 

:>^-oc.  *4J  sJlS^  n^ry»  nv^Dij  Jls  ^4-jj  Dnyo  ^.^-.^l  ^y  Jl  ^,^^-^0  nnyo  Jy 

s^^ll   ^   JlSj    laJii    123^    DnyO    m^N    ^y    JUj    »Ja.a-o     ^j     »-*^   ijl     (^    c^ju«j 

3  5  nmon  ^^  i ...fl,>  e^^l  Jl  ^-^  nnionsi  Jy^     «  pid33i  3nT3  133^  ^^1 

^j^  ^j\   Ul  ^^y  J.-.-'fi  133    ni^N   tay   a^ryo  nv3o^  ntj^yi   J_jjj     ♦  3nT3 


ID  .n  vcws 


1  nn^n  X.        "  Jlc— 1.  u  Jl  om.  PX.         "  P  only;  cett.  DDN^N;  perh.  *LuJl. 
*  Om.  K.         '  Peril.  ij.*ju«  «,»-<».  *  *-*.!  om.  X. 

R  2 


«»   - 

(^U   jUj^l   ^]^i   cy^*^  (^5^!   ^^^?=^^   C^^==*^W    (•J^-^.   OJ;-^b^^  '^b)^ 

ti)  sJ!  (J^  (^^^  'o^U3!  iJ4.4Ai  (_5^  >v^.  b)    ^^^  *b^^  c5^^  '"^ 

1^.    «^W^    5«*/«^.    (^    T^b)b|^    1^^^-?.    ^j^    (J^     'Wyt^jli     Vb^b|^  ""^ 
^{3^]  jXSii,  e>y^.  (^(j«3!  c>^c  tf^l  ^  *W.y»b)^  (i/ycosJ  (J^Jts*  n       10 

JU  15^5  jut*   x^b  dilil'^  Jl   [sji]  jwa5  ^^j5o  ^Jl  s^.  liivnjD    ntJ'yi    Jy 
iJina  ntry^  <UJji>  [U/i]  j^\  *L^i  x^^l  xJu^  ^i  j'  x^l^l  Jl  JU^^*.; 
*^   v_.^l^  ^J\   sj  ^^^  ^Jyo   ^^1    ^.j  -i^nm  p^n^   hdini   U^lj  n^ion 
^liij  jjj  ^^:^1     ♦  ^jj^^.^.*^  ^^^^-iiJl  u^  i^  J^j  u-J-«^l  v/=^  L5JJ^  Q''VnrJ!  15 

Jlii   JUil   J.^  ^li   ,j!yi   ^^j    ti'npoJl  ^_j    J-oj;-o   ^Jj    j,jil   j_^    slxij  Lo  jS-i 

ba  b  i^y  ^nan^i  Doi-in^i  JU  ^.^    ♦  sj^^i  U  Ji  J^  sJlj  JU>  JiJ  dJjj  s-Jlc 
^U3!^  ^N  ^3  ^y  han^  nonn^i  Jj^jl  ^  e^U^l  il-.  j-^l  Iju*  j  /i  »j1  ^\  20 
mijN  ^3  l^yi  ^h^\^  J'^'  ^^  ^'"""^^  ''"^^^  ^^^  e^3U3L  nix^aj  nm^  d^^n  ba  bv^ 
ij«^j  vnuN  iniyi^  i6  ik'n  m^N^  ouooLJU  nnyo  m^N^i  o-lv<I^L  pn^  n^ 
»Jy  jjLo  dJij  ms^aj  nm^  o^i'N  ba  bv)  »J>s  j-c  jJlil  j^  »"^1  iLJl  s Ia  ^^  r .'  'ist 


^  inyD  X.         2  ^^D  X.         =>  nana  codd.         *  -ids^  p  x.         »  n^jiin  'ip3 
hjn^i  x. 


j^jJI  ^y  Jji-jJl  Jlc    >Ub"    i!iii]l    sift   ^^^   iy^D['']   i^JJl  Jl  »J  ^r*-^  >wl   ^^^i*^, 

10  ^Ul   Lp.    vJ-r^-    nipi'pi'n    J   ^^UJi    11*    dlj^    mp^pi^'na    m3!?»    p'»Tn»i 

(jU  ^;;.^i-J*il    ^;_^    ^^^    Jj    JG    JJl    J^\':>\    u^y-i  (JiAl^   »-B  A ^^    D'1'''315'»J1 

20  j*4^j)/*^-   "i^'^^'    J^   u^u^J   ^;>*J  J-v^^— ^   Wi-^    i:r»    i:^^-    (*^   US    L-^O*^ 

25  o    « '131  man^  ^  kUJl  ^^Ji^Jl  »1a  ^Iju.  ^■:.  :,..^  n-inh  cna  ^r\)i\>  JLs  dJjJU 


[II.  3.]  R 


|^JlX.io  y^^i  (^i)^  U<^J  eyloo^li  Lma3cV?.  c)«4*3!  e^AjJa^j  rr  i '  J-^ 

nnn  ^rKn»i  ^.^^  jUi  j^jJl  ^^  l>*r^j  l^^i^  J--«Jlj  ^^--J^  Jj^^'  »^ 
cu5^\  ,.^^U  (..^j^  Jj:  ^^yij  J-jV-i  ^j^  ^y  J\  y-^5  iK^yi  ip'TH''  vn^N  ^ynv 

(^^   i^JLia.>    *Uii:    ^     y^    iyxi^i   J^l^-^    ^    r:^-^   *-*^    1>^-    r^  Jr"    "-^    *^^ 
^  J-s^lr*-i!   (j^->    e;*  ^;-=?/^-    ^3   W*.   ^y>-*^.^    minJL>   l^I^^-iJj   J— U  !ul  U^^   sJLjj  io 
J^j1^.«o  ij-o  j-iA^  r/*"^  ir^  c^^^^^  >j^   *^-*J^   ^■*'  ly  ^J^.  >i^  \xaj  t**/^  r^ 
Oyi    cH>^'   ^J^    ^^=^/^'   1^    ^^^    L5^    J^J  j>4-i-»    ^J-*_j    4>^-    l^^J    e^"^^    l^ 

♦  iK^yi  ipnn''  vn!?N  ^ynv 

(__^AAu^*    t^AAuJo   (^•y^AAj*   (^vaaCU   i^^^i^.  (_^>jLu!J!  c_^c)-Ji»^*  rr 
^^w»  j^f  <ji^  u>*^.   ^'^■'^  i^'^'i   »^yj    *  i''"i^«  'V'lV  ^  n''i?^:DK^»Jl  *:>)^ 

lj^»-Vj    ^    ^1^    liLi    ^^.jJI  ^^.^  ^JJJfc^irr!    ^    jJJl    ^^JJO    *4JJol    IjpJJj    »-*JiJ^j>  J^jLmmJ 
3in3    sJjJLS  ^LJb    *4-iJtJj   i^-^-^lb    ^hAi,    ^jJiJ>  Jw^j^.^^   Ijui   J-i^jq  dU j5^  ^Ul 

a_lm.  »!L»  sJl  v/fi-ij  D''^''  J^  (.J    *  (•4J*^^j  (^4:;  v^-^j  i.^!-— '.  ;« 4  -^-Mj  nani'31 20 
nnn  ^y^tn»i  »ajo  Jlij  n?oy^  iiD»  o^ynn  J^  'p  '3  ^nry  bv  Dyn  JU  &Jl  JlcIj 
bv  Dyn  Jpl  ^y  Jyi^'  CU.J1  L^J^  J^  m^f  J^]^~o  J^  iSj^  »il  ^-f]JWJ 
Jjjj    ♦  nnn^jni  nnni  jjj--.UJl  11*  j>  dJi  _^  j  nt^yi  JUj  K>np  rfna  ""any 

jJj^Ull    ^    ^j^i    Q>b'2^12i\    ^j)i    n'b'2^K)}\    \y^   (^jJl    pjJLll   Jl    w  ^,.^^    I^C'OJI 

'   Dnon^  BK.  '^  DnJN  PX.  ^^  Perh.  ^^jjJjl^j.  *  Om.  till  end  of  para- 

graph P  X.  °  'ipi  codd. 


irv  «  ^Lo|t>    Juio    ^y^  * 


5  *il(>3l    (^A>Oj    (^^AAasxJl    C>«cM4^    \Jc^j    {jy^   S-^    9^0^j  I"' 

prnJl  (_^  »^   *jjb"  (^jJl  jA_j  nyon  cnpon  i^^m  Ujua.i   ^U^^l  »1a  J.^ 
loj^  T^tJ^'^i  4j-"  tj'npm  ii)!jni  U^J*  JUj  n^i'tj'm  JU  j^*  iinpD  pao  n^^ti'ni  Jy-T 

JjLo^-s^jj  (J^^  !i-^»  r/^   "-^^    ''-'•   >H^  wHI  »-5_jJj   Lr^^^   (^^  »-^-^)   s-^/*^  »-^^   M 

15  0^1  ^_^  jij\  D^o^^fJl  jo^  sil  »^  vyjj  DDC'D  ppB*.!  i3nji  U4A  i\j^  n^onn 

r.r3'-i2T    J   ^jj    ool^D^D^vJl    sJ^j    3K1D    pptJ'    Enoaijl  JJU^    DH^VIpB'    nN    IN^m  JJL. 

3  .J?  '7nn  ^  ^  ^li  u^  'Lx»  iUs*  *U^\  ^  innJl  ^  ^jl  jjLfflj  nnn  d»!5v  n^ya 

»Jl  ^    »^    ^yJl  ^yC^    D^VJI    <j«^   Jlc  ^^l^^Jl    DDB'O    ppK'H  Unil  ^^^  »>JyJ 
20  U^*-^  Lrtr«J'    U>^   »-*-»^   (Ji    slJjS,    u'j    Uj-"^>^   U^^   -^^   L5^   ^/-^i 

a.na  D^o^v  »^  il  Dn?  J^j  0.. ..H  jjb  °p»-iNJl  ll^i  Hja^  N^  Dhy^J  i^y»  nnr^  p»iN 


'   rsVD  X.  2  om.  X. 


*4-dc     \^r*^j    *J-^j^.    lM]/-^    ^     »^J^    J-»-»J    ^_yi-«J     i^W     »J>^J       *  i-^UaJi    ^^.  ^^      I  I  J-ai 
ii>^  ixSj    sjuij      ♦   sjJb    ijl  jjjo   elLlj    Xsoj    (jrtJkiil    0«-i-o    ^j-A-»-jiil    i^4-Jl   *Aj    •'^t?>**'*^ 

Jl5   o     ♦  ,_;-jLfiil  e*^  JJLc  3J3J1  dJL»  ^JLC         ^^ 

jjij  njjJI  ^  Jjfcjo  ^^  ^^gijti  nitj'^  »^1  j}>.\  J\  xJbj  nj)i»J\  *U.  Ul  ^^l  ^ij!si 

Jli  '121  in3  nyi  j.laj  to  j^  JLs  U  ^  Ublj  pyijy  n^ni  ^  _^!  ^.laj  U^ 
^  s/ii-x  U  Jl  ^^-^  njnnsai   iJjjj^    ♦  mitj^Nia   ^^^n  n^i  JjJb  ^^-^^  11a 
323n  n^D  Jlc  Jl*-.-tj   u-^LJ  14!^  00 iT  Jj^U  icy  njin^  p  nyni  ^>,>vjj 

^   ^j^^   LT^    ikl^l    djtj^l     sjukj    Jly.»Jt.j     jJlc     ajjn  *17)0J    I4JLS    ^j5sJ    s^f^^lj  15 

♦  njnnx3i  njitj'NiD  n'-nn  n^  Jl5 
♦  o^cs*3!  c)-^  e5$^  C5^  o^a*^  (^>r^  cW*^  C>«<>i3!  cv^c 

yt  UjIj   s-Jlc    i__fil)U  ,j«^    nK321  sJjJj      *   ,^.jJ^  ^/  J_>=»->    ^  iclkJl  o^  Jy>^ 
Jjjj       «   sjJJ   ^^.   ^4JL*  J^lj   Ji  _^,.--XiJ  (^^ijo    jjljJJl   jJLcj   j^Ul  ^Jlc  i__fii)Lc 

J^   ^^^   J  j-)aili   i_jb    IIaj    (%4-J^    :>jjo  ^iH  ^Ij   (%.ft-S^  *J    *lj^b   J-jjI^^.^ 


Jl^s 


n?1N?N  codd.  (as  frequently;  cp.  Fleischer,  Kl.  Schr.  i.  337).  ^  Om,  P  X. 

Line  21.  Ul>Lc. 


iro  *  (_JLOiL>  jJLxy  T^y^  *• 


''"'"''''"'    i^Ll-    dJJJj    ij.141    ^;;-.    uP^^-    J^    's'J^    uj/-  u-^  p^^^   ^^     *^.^ 
5  ^K  J^j  nino  ikiJ  ^y^ar.-...^  '^ii^j  HB^np  iJaiJ  ^y  ,.>•■•...>.  n^ij-iyJU    *  onnDo 

Jlc  yjil  j,^i5^  Ji  u.  Jo/,  ninn  nnN  inx  Jy^    *  ujV^j  (^.^  ly  j>^ 

l-Jii     ♦  »/-^jM   i--^  ij^    (j-i>>  *j\)    »J^    ^j^  j^^  py^  ij\j  c*.i**^  jJ   |;>-^^  U 

^ySb  ^  3\  jj^lj  gjJL.  J-Jy-^j  jj^lj  ijJL.  Jlc  ^ySb  ^^  D^^jnyJI  j»l*i.  Jit 
^jlj  « s^y  1  11a  ^^  J->y-j  *Jk  nnx  }ni't5>  i^yi  Jy*  inay  ^iij  ^pB>  iij  ^,^  jj- 
^^^iUJL  nns  jn^ty  Ju:  c)>--V-  ^^  UAls^Uj)  ^^-^  j-w  ^hn  |ni?B>  ^jl  Ulii 

^3  Jy^  ♦  n^jvn  xh  JU  dJjii  JjiLi*  ^^-olx.^  u^j^  J-"-  J^  |^  ^V^  ^j 
^.jo  Jli^-'  li^^w**  ^_^oJjlj  ^j\  Jl  nv3^»  p  Jl  ^y->  jJJ  U^  ^^iJq  nyioi?  fp  niy 
sill  »ju*  j»j^  tj^uji  ijjk  ;ji  jj^ij     4-  j_^y«^.  ^^*^j  J^j«-*-^j  (»j'i^ 

20  (Jt*jt>*  o»Jc)-i3i  t^c  ^_jic  juX>«  j»-isla£  >-y*^i  *-*s»^  (_y^  <?^^^>^  '''' 
jL^yi  j\  ^ji  j»:l-^i  u,^u  ^J\  ^^  j^uJij  ^-J«ji  ^^  2:jn  ^^0J►  Jjjl* 

25  j^UJl  ^y  Jy/jyyo  'ijl  JL£  K-Jji  ^_5l*i  unh  Jy^    *  3Jjn  n^JD^X-*  ur" 

^y^i  jyy-J  sjixxJi  j^.j-i  j*^<  ij^  u^u^  t/^-  <^^  ^^^  ^^^^  c^^^ 

'  pm^^  P ;  \\y\y  =  ^y^js^.  cett.         2  p-,2^0  p_         3  -(3^^  o^iy  b  D  K  X;  ^-\:i> 
only  P. 


wjj^i>^.  o\   Kz>-^.  ^^   ^S^  ^"^^^3  J^  lA^^=^  ^^J/^^  <J^y^^.  *    ' '  "J'^ 

*  C^?^)'^^  (^•^   KJ»r^^A   0/^=^.  J^-«^«*<V^^    ^j)>-«J^»^.  5^^-»i3   CS^-^^    "^^ 

(^jJl^^-^--^lyjJl  dJj  ^  ykj  ^_5i  njjJl  elL.  Ixj  J  isil  j^  nniji  ma  ny^i  J^ 

Jjo    ^^J  jjj.»L*uj   Ca^j   Jj  ^jLXi  '131  Dy03  .^^  >3  J^  (^JJl   »^1   t5-iL-«  ^   sjt-e  ^jlS  5 
1^15    (jJJJi   (•J/''}    i-jUsifc   ^^1     i-»*   ^^^-*J    ooIj    AJti J\    » -Lfti       ♦   »,X*»^    jS^   ^fc5 

i»jPI   dUu   lacL-^li   ,^!xii\  cxo    ^1    w»^  Jj».j    »Jl    'LJijJI   ^JAxJ>  ^JJ   *L^I  ^ 

j!S\  jS^  ^^^\  J^L^  jS^  ^Ji^^X-*^.  |U  33jn  n^tt  s-s-sJ  dJllj  hiJ  ^''nn  sJ^ii^ 
Jl  ^,^,}  icy  i6)  JlSj    ♦  nxD  *iy  di^^vi  JyiJ^  s^JLc  :>!;  si^  ^)L.'3\jSL.^  ^  lo 

s^^Lc  Jl^^-^  2^n^  ''3  dyj     ♦  L^^U  ^J::^\  U  j_L£  ^^1  »jli  njjn  i^fD  ySL^ 

J:^\  UJl  !i_iUlc  ^^\  j;^  najn  ^^»J   Ij^Ai  ^l^^l   ^^^L»  JLi!  i^l^  U  j^jlc 

PN  JL-J  dJi  jjL«i  D^^i^n  li'SJi  Jyi^^Ji^  ,jJu>  ,»4jl*  J^j  ^^^l  ^^  ^^^1 

•>  Ijui  Ljl«jj  Jl  ^j^l  1^  ^)L^'3\  t^^^Lfl  i'xnti''*  15 

CSPOn  DlT'JtJ'l  Jjii     ♦  diL*  sUUx  ,j-jLflil  o^.  \jjx — ')  Lo  x:^^  diL>   ^  » ^  t  ,v  > 

ji"  j^j^--o  Jl  ijj-^*  [uj^.]  t5^.  y^»^  Mn^  Jyj    •>  ^^ji}j^))\^  ^^  s^\j]\  20 
|npti>  7yi  »J^j    ♦  (jf^tajJi  ^^j  ^^^1  ^^ ^U?  jA  U  ^J^  <^j^  ^Is.  ^4ju  j^lj 

pmyn»  ^^ljl»^   j,Ijl»  ^.^^-,^-  ^  JLib  Jlij      ♦  ^^1  ^Uc  J5b  ^.^ju  j^lj 

^^■kks-»   ^    dLlJij  isrijJl    ^J    ^'^::^\   J   v_jjjti  ULjt-*  Lj>^  UXKK'iX  yiD 


1  n-iV  B.  2  Peril.  J^^.  3  pgrj^   j^  (.4:4];*.  *  PD^  X;   pON^  P; 

pa^  (only)  B  K. 

Line  i6.  ilSj. 


^jn  yi  (^JJl  ^N"^B^  ""Jn  d^L,  Jl  u.  Jwai  »j\  J-Jj  nnx  yiiti'  D^nb  nnn  n^nam 

«  c>mU3|  (;ys>  J^Aii>  (►ii*^  vWj  j^  lV*j^.  2^i  (_^:^UaxJ\  e>^  '''" 
jAj  nnn  ij'^n  J^^l  ^.^U  Ji^r^^.  v^n  nnannn  pi  »Jyu  j.-^\  ^^1  J-j 

lO  *U\    Nj).    ujb^    ^*-UjL>.    |J    V/0    (J^*J^^  (J'^k.c)-?.    2M->.c)4^  ^^U^LU^    V^-^    ''>' 

♦  ;^SjJtl  Ijufc  ^y  Jj^  IIaj  mnn  b^n  ^y  Jyu  tsUi^j  rvb^^  Nni  |.1ju  U  ^^  Jls 
"IK'S  nu^yi  sJyj     *  *juJ1  ^4;'  W*  i_yJ^  jW^'  u-*^^  ls*[j]  '^^^'^^  '^otj^ai  Jy^ 
15  *  »^l  J^j  U-»  ^  sJUj^  ^^  J  »jl  ujJIpj  J^Ij  ^I  J!\  ^^-sjLi  'wi  iK'y  nV 
^^^  vyJ'j  ^  ■■>»'?.  11  'lliJlj  («jJb  jjlS^sJl  jjij  11TT  oni?  cuni  bh^\  no  Jl5  ^ 

« ..,  a  •■  1    JJ^b    ^j    il-la:^    W^    UJul*    U-r4Jj    ^J\sL^\       Jli    lilj        ♦  ^yjJl    i->j^\j 

8J  ^,.^^  <^1  Ul>  n]2  Jy     ♦  iiD^  Dn^j  Bnani  i'i'K'i  nn  Jls  diijj  'j^  Ujl^ 

2  0  Jl  »j>  jo^  'iai  Dni*30  ^yi  »J^j    ♦  *j^j  ^UjI^  ijyj-.  JL4J  K^iam  vW^J'  ^^^^^ 

ca..mXxj1  s.b^l  cajj   *U-  UU  »Jl^l  j_^  i^\  *^Uj  ""^j  m  J^/i  riy  lyi  Jy. 


DnnsnaNi  codd.       ^  /^^ijj^  ^^^  -,3  -^^jj,,  L,t,jj^  p_       3  KninriDQ  codd. 

Q  2 


jjLffj  !i5JL«  JV^yj  j_5ft  ^1  iljJb  jjl  ^yo  JLvfi^l  »Jla  J-^jo  ^Jl  Joo  8Jl  *— */^ 
oWi  p»U)   ^^^^   »^34^   »^?^4-?  (_y«^*^^  VV:^^  TT^S^  ^_^  tJtii^  •   r .        5 

-i^3y»  Uli  nD^»  -nn  ^U)U  c>ai3  i"'3yo  Uac>-^)  e;-^--^  ^^y*-"^  c^-*  *-^jj  ^^^ 
n^iHN  D^D^ni  J_ji3  &jX*  Jjiai  i^  iji  ^^j     ♦  ni3^D  -nn  JUj  dDlU  j^. 

^jU  11a  ill   aJU^j   a-«j5  J  ^^l5  dJUil  *^-i  ^^  j»l5  dJLo  J$^^^l  ^  nnJ  JU 

jJLjO      mPtJ'l     N31    »J^5j        ♦    \  <i  la  >»  * ')    jj-Lx^    KJ^*^     IS^ySLA    StLj^lj  jljJL*     »J     ^^S^     J 

p''tnm    sJyj       ♦  j»juu    ^j-»-o   »^^  J.xi  U^^Laji.  ^^^«^_J    i-JH*  ^r^-   "^^    **^-  J^"^ 

DDi  Jy  ^^  ai^nJl  ^  »/s  L.  ^L.j  prnJl  ^^  ^Sl  U  yb  nip^p^nn  niaijo  25 
^m^r\  niy-in  Jjij    •>  nin^n  pnoi  prnJl  ^^---^"  ^  Jy^^  ivi?  p^?Di  pnan  Ij^dd 

'   'lp3  f'odd. 


IV  (j_5^li^^^  8Jl  J^  'iji  n^K'J  nni  Jy^  *  nss'vi  Jy5^»^  J^joj  jr^Jy-i  (j^  ^JW^I  ^r* 

5  *]j:*Jl  i^^iwo  dJj  ijlXi  J^];-.^  »1^  L.J  ^bJl  e^^Jl  ^y  2j:n  n^»  J-x  L. 

*  'wi  ncy^  N^i  Jyi^yiTL.  Jlc  ^^^I  I^-j  I^^-jlj^^  ^^ 
^y>/o^l   lt>A  (Jias^*   ev^'^^  L^^^^-"^  >^^!>^  cj^   M^  l)^^=^    '^ 

«  JU3\    5^.    S^AA/O    ^;/!^AC    5s3^AiU0 

ajaJl  J^^  ^y  j,l5il  »xaJ  (.>*^j  r^J  J^j  \.^^aP^  ^j^i  u^^r^i  w'y^yo 
dLL.    ^^    333JI    (sLU    (jlS^   OJJn   p»    »J    iJl*^    L«  Jo.    ^^-::->^    ijl    »J^-^    UJlj 

jUc^il  %xst  psvn  i^D  J-^  Uli  iny»  i^y  Jl  »y:  L.  jjx  u.  J-^  U>  psvJl 

pvp  n^n'k^^m   Jyi"'  pc^n  n^»  ^^  ajjn  n^o  i^-o^*   J^"  eUi   aj^  njjn  ^i5»J 

15  Jisx:  sJl  L.  A-.J  i^ijo  insnn  ^nb  JU  J    «  psvJl  dJL.  ^  pvpJl  lx»  inann 

JjLj   J  j^jLiil  O^.  ^^1   tfJJl  333n  n^D  ^^l  (sDij   323n  n^»^4^   ^j   %^  ii>*il 

llji  L.li  "^^-ir^  -^"o  jL^.  J-^  U  J^  pavn  n^D  sl^i  U  j-lc  Uil^  pavn  nbo 
pavn  ni^D  J-*Jti  J^4^  J^j  »^-jL$  ^,1^.  ^j  s;^-^  ^  J^j  8JLLJX.  Jl  »];i  iwU 
Ij^^*    *  1^  i^^''  main  ^ni?!  Jli  dJJli  m  3«n  ^i5»  Jj^j  ^  ^i\  ajan  i^oj 

2o^;^L^  ^y.  ^J^^\  i^y^  v:^^->  ^i>-^  c5*J  ^"'"'  "l^^J  J^^^"  "I^'^  o^.^j^^  zr* 
pavJl'  e)Ju  Jl  na^Jl"  eUu.  1^  "j^UJL  [m  c^ykj]  pavJl  dUu  Jl  aj:Jl  elL. 

23jJl  eiU  Jw^  jJi  a:jJl  elU  JLc  pavJl  diLV  iJUJlj  pavJl  (sUu  Jl*  njiJl 

le    i_ili     i^4»    iiJ^     (V    ""^^  i::jljt9j     (.iJiJiJl    sXftj    pBVJl    (sUi    ».Vjkljj    ^j.*SMi 
2  5^»!   IXftj    iljJb    J.^    J     paVn    ^^D    (]^^  ^jlSj   pliii     U   j^jJ    U^    US    dJ-«  [/ 

*f  ^j-jJKJlXi   ^^Jufc   ^^^wi    L^/^   "tL/^ 


1   Perh.  j^..       2  ^^ora.X;  DIDnD,  D12p  codd.       "  mna  codd.       *  niK'Ponlyj 
nine'  cett.  °  223J\  and  pavJl  transposed  in  D  X. 

[11.3.]  Q 


(sUjJ;^  Uj  'iUl  Jjpj  ^^01  J^U  lAik  .^.^  «^^j  ^^W^  ^^  J'jJ  s-^    ' '  ^ 

«  e^U^  5 

paxn  "jijD  KU^i  Jy  jjK^  ^jl  e^,^^,^LjJ\  diL-  ^^JL*  U  joc  psxn  i?^  ^^  ^Jlf' 

*  \  ./.]n  •.'^ .n%  ijjjwo  L4JI  J^  nnv3D  n^y  ns^Ji  Jyil  Ujj>bj  islLUl  aj^j^^^U^j  ^^^1 
^ fL^  ^^  ':n  'd  Ijy  nroy^  D^m  ^^4^  Jyil  ^^Q]  '131  najn  nwnn  d^^j  10 

jJU  ^^*bL«JJ  njjn  n^JO^^^La:  ^^  jJU  JxLJ  pDvn  h^jd  ^!jj  UjI  *i)^  1^_  liU 

*  vcj^  (..5^^  *|J^!  04,1 15 

'^■^*»    CJ/^^    >J^*^    LS*    WUjOj^    mVJ    »J    UJ-^^J    PSVn    1^0    liJ^    ^    uy-»*i    (»^^ 

n»y^i  Jyi  ibjls  «!.  J-JJ^-^  ;_^1  ^i  ^.-Jbj  s/L^c  »jt*j  psvn  ni?»  ^x^jl^  20 

«  (;M^  jJ  ^  eA<^  ^  IaoIxu*^  s^^viast?.  *UiU3|  cy^5  d^^J^.5 
cnc'^i  Jy    *  AJL^  J4yJlj  AjyJl  333JI  dJLo  ^IjJb  j..^  pavJl  dJu  ijl  >_i*;:e 

»  Perh.  dJjiT  2  NH^PX. 


1 1 
ir 


'^-^     PV^**t?  y>i^  lA-^^»-?   C5=?=*^   C5?=^-  o^^  c:>^^i   *l^«aib;;;^  (^^^ 
»j  ^y  tjj5C  ^  ^t^^p  n^y  ^jyi  noy  ^y  inm  D^y3B>  D^yuB'  Jy  Jl  »j  ^^^^ij  d>j{j> 

^TO    [Jl    itLi»    ijjJ^^    1>^^    *-*^/4J'    J^    iiil^    j»  a :  a )    cy^    j;/-;-^^    *LaiJl    J^ 

US^aan  ^^D  ju^j^^^U-jJI  »1*  pavn  nijD^^-i^  »Xi.l  sju*  *UiJl  »jl>j  »jpLl  aaan 
io(^^A^  t_5^  3j:i3i  »^CU  ^^  L^i^.  o^A^^^b!^  «^'  e5*j  'i* 

^oy  "i^nD  '•m  »JjJ»j    *  psvJi  dJu  Jjoj  ^LS   iL-j:  n-Jl  t_lJL:L»  naaJl  diL*  JU> 

l^l*^    (JJJI    *Aj    r*^^    "^^    L?,l-»-Ji     Jyi    C^JJl  J^    vLs-»'     Jl  _^^-wiJ    SJl    J-J 

15  v±JLi!lj  e]L.>^Jl   :>lLo  (j^m^j^  ^y^'   ^^^^^^l   (^HT  j^yi   iij^^jt-o  ^^U-lj   J-^^^l 

^^*  jJjj  (jjJl  jjfc^  c^IZJTnjrTIZ^  /*^1/^'  jjjL-  bi  (jJjj^  ->-^*^  3-^-SJliiy 

^1  ^y  dU.   :i)j   ^^.JJ1  lj^*l   p4J^  lOV  ^X^"1S  ^331  Jjij  ^.-^   i^U  Jy  L.  gUj 

20  Jl  M  jLil  u^  u^  ''^'^^^^  ^^j  ♦  (^>>^'j  C^U*^'  ly  i^Ij-^-^"  ct*  j>4-^ 
JyJ  sJIiil  Jl  w  ^Li.1  J^  J^^  ry^_r^.  cP„>»  c^*  f^^j/^  "^^  "^lA'  ^>^-  v^ 
^^  J^  l^^  aJl  J^.  ^^U»-.  lj};U  j^^  dUi  xo  J-J>-j  Uy.-  ^l;li  itty 
w-»;!xi  l^tJ'aai   JU»  dJJJLi  »^1   ^^  ^"  till  ^/j   jjl  Jlj  oJ^l  dJi  i^''  J-ol/-^ 

yi5^^  i;>^Jl5C]l  bjL-ilj  usy.  U^5lUl  i>;u    ♦  ^j  j.4^  J-V-^.  12)^  u' 


1  }nv  P  X ;  |in^  K ;  pn^  b  d.  *  niri  D  K.  '  oha  B  k  ;  I'ha  p  x. 

*  nyn  p  b.       «  NOi  Q(?);  nmi  bpkx.       «  cn^Niyn  KX.       '  Perh.  li^. 


*  cJyV>iL>    JLuu    >■>-**'  * 


I   lA 


^  •    <^^*->^l     ^Py^-    J^)     C^*-^5     ''^     <?"*^:^    ^;5luoJl     (Js4.S}Jij     I  r  H  J-ai 


^Jlc  ey_jVj  33JJ1    lalUu  J.^.   Jjj   A&yj    (»5   33J-li  eU-o  ^JU   (jjyu   *j   t— fi-H«-^  5/*^ 
jJLc  sJoo    »j^j1   ^ySj  »J*^  Juxj  ^j\  I itc  o      ♦  i—fl-wjt-o  S/i^lj  < B-*-«-o  iJjli  (sUi  J^  5 

JJ>ljj    ^_5illJl   33iJl    (sJLL.    J^jj   U5    J^jo    I^Ui    is  Jo    cu^-*    e^yWJlj    ^}^  y^  (•4^ 
^j^-i/pr4   1jUj>   Jjb    Jj  nan''   JlJj     ♦  dJi   ^Js.   ^.jJi    *4j|^    ^♦■"■a-U   lU-o   b-o\  jU 

^;j^JL»JlJ    I^J^lj     JjL»i:    ^>*-»-»-    LftJuLxi    dJj     (Jl    *4-i-*^    As    iS-Jj:    iu--»^    U-*    ,^5^  1° 

V331  !iij\  JUj    ♦  ^4JL^  Is^  8il5^  ^^  -y^.  J  najJl  «2)iL.j  ajjJl  lalU  ^^  jJii  jJd. 
J».^l  j^lj  Jl  _^,-^  ^DK'i  N13  Nil  JU  o  aaan  h^jd  \^\j  ^  ^j\  ^Jj^  najT" 

!uu*j-o  ^^  dJW^-  J  2i:n  i?D  ^J\  (j]j  Uii  uan  i^o  iJLjj^  J\  ^_5S^-  ^J\  is/s^^-^.  Jj 
jpt-il  (gUi  xxjtj    ♦  nryo  ny  mjn''i  3e>''i  Jls  dUlU  JJLo  iijxo  Jl  »]^j  (.?^?^^  ^5 
»il  8-^  ^J^  }iQvn  n^»  Dy  JLs  J  loy  dh^ji  Jy^    ♦  »-Jl  -^/U  Jl  3J3J1  dLL. 

(sUi  33jn  pD  (%i—^  lalJj  A^^JtJ  333JI  dUuj  ^jj/aIoj  ^jl  j« ^ U Ij  sjuj  ^^X-^j  ^J!-:>- 
«-.^fijL>  psvn  i^D  c>4^j  2jjn  i^JD  uJis^^j  pQ^{^  i^o  oijl  (^jJl  ^^^JdJ^,^--JJl 
J^j  s^y  L.  p2vn  i^)D^,5L-x  ^^  l»l  jjli^nism  ^''^sni  Jy^  ♦  »jJb  ^l  :>jjo^  20 
JwoIjJ  ei^Lo  jL3.!i)  ^^^o  i)  ^jljo  ny  i6)  s-J^j  ♦  ^/^j  ^,5L-jJ1  ^^  ij-Ul  ^^  JU 
^Jl  (jjjL*  «-r^j  <sJJ^  J-^  ^J^  *-^^  iiJ^  »JJ!^  j*j  uJwJ  ^j^,  ^^li*i  J5J1  Jj 
cj-lcj  ^j^l  IjJJJu  caSjJI  tsUj  ^^j  liil\  jj^l^  j_;-jJiJl  (J^^  (J JJl  _j-»  333J1  dLL«  Iju* 
sjufc    ^j\    jLso    ^jl    j_5»-*-^j    N/TII    I4JLC    »Jy5   X»g]ia,c    »^,-j-fJ   *j]^-s^    i^L^j    (•4^^"* 

^  TlND  X. 
Line  3.  l|^,  ^.[Jujuo.  10.  ^,^ls^..  11.  IjJb  etc.  i7.J^^-m**  etc, 

18.  ljj«aj.  21.  liLc,  25.  ^^o. 


II  J«fli   nJjij^  ijl^\  Jlc  cdU  Jj  pavJI  (sUu  ^jlij  »p  3a:n  n^JoJ  ^^  J  njl  uj];!c 

"         J-*;  u^  "^  (>».    c^  <^^  ^iJ"-^  cr*   u^i:;^    "-^j  c^   (»J  »^'  (J^)  J>^ 

5  ])?^)irt  i?D  J\  ^JJJi^\  ^J\^ ^sJ^\  jSL^\  J\  [jSC^\]  jsi  ^j^^  b^nr\  Jjn  nim  Jy^ 

(jyLijj  i*^  *4-j  J*j«j  jo^  Dna  ntyyi  Jy^    *  eUdl  ij^xo  iJSU.j  pavn  i^dJ 

1 .'  'cm  Jy^    ♦  ^nr  niB>N^  inx  dj  JyiS^  i'siti'^  '•i'JVi  ^^1  diL.  J.«i  ,j.»jl*.  ^^  *4-s-U 
lo  (jU  jJlc  t.,^  ci^^  u^  ^^  *>^^  *'^^  A"^  (^j    *  'Jl^^j  '^'^^  *^JU  r*  ^'^"'2"*^^ 

^^'  3J3n  ^i'0  ^^  J  ^^  ^_5-^  ^j  ^^^\  j^j  Dntr^D  mc'v^  Jy  ^  Ll»^ 
15  tJoo  tJ^i3 

♦  s^il  Jl  aaan  h^jd  A«jyj  eUi  x*j»j  njin  li^D  LcU»  c*^  psvn  nijD  Jj».jo  ^^^ijo 
m3.m'touj  in  dv  dn  in  Jy  jJL.  psxJl  eiUL.  oj-  j^o  ^  ^^jLjj  jj^  noy*  d'3b>  wm  Jy^ 
cy^  J  ^  pasJl  eUL.j  cy^  Jpl  3JJJI  elL.  wl5Ci  j»,  ^^_  u  jj^  D^or 
20     «  niJn  h^dJ  i£.U»  t^^J-  JJj  cyj-.-^  ^yUJl  23:J1  dJU  »!-»  ^^^j  psvJI  csJUu  csJUj 

♦  jOxasx^  ^^1  ;^J!acOC^  <?^^:^  jy^'^J  ^-t^^^^ 


ih"!  codd.  "^  Ins.  DP  only.  '  Perh.  ^.  *  Peril,  'bl. 

Line  6.  j_jiJl .  8.  U^.  14.  U.*j«-».  19.  ll*.  20.  \Jji. 


*  cJ^^^oJumj  p^jj^  ♦  lit 

♦  (^\J9j^\  ^  W?^i^  l^vuiolL  l^AAsR^  "* J^^ 

^XiJ    iiiij^    j,4J:^    ^li    ^^^.^ju«   I4LJ    ^yi,    ^^-<^jl*,    S jSjj^    Jj    D'*3K'    Kph    JlS 

Ijufcj  }iavn  n^D  Jl  ^,^Lj:  iwn  i^jd  J^l  (sllj  Ja.1  ^J^  njjn  n^»j  pavn  ^!?D 

^^  i^  ijlS  L.  ^_gU  pjjq^  sJ-taj  ^^  ^^1  iu-«  cjJLkJ  M  j^,  Dn5i>''D  niJj'j;^ 

^^o  isju  i^\j\  L*  Jl  psvn  n^o  «-*-V^^  (-'^  u^j^'  x^jo  pavn  i?D  ^^  k-aI^j  io 
pavn  i^D  |,ljj;  e^Lo  njjn  h^jd^^sCoJ  ^^„  ^Jis  najn  n^»^5Clji  ^^Ls^-  ^^  njjn^ 
j.Ias  j,^^  UilS^njjn  ii5»_^,SL^  ^_^  ynrJl  ^jl  juilj  vnrn  na  nvyn  Ni>i  Jjii^ 

jj  lu*^  dUI  ij^  »jt^  ^Lij  ^5l»jJ\  ^x)  nan  i^D  »-vaJl  (^jJl  J^L^\  ^xo  Jl  15 
«^5C1^  ^^1  sjjLc  ubj2  pavn  ^i5oy*  »j:))  U  ^^U  ju*^  dJij  ^X-^^  (^  ^- 

J^  ^,^1^1  11a  lU*  jj»  y IS^  j,jj  J\  j^^^  QTiyi  npnnoi  Jyj    *  uilX*  ^^ 

j^l5lo    ^J\    ijjJtayJ    ^    »Pwc    j_^    CJ>*/^-    (^i    ^^\    lii    U^    (^4^'    »-"*M  20 

♦  D^nyi  npnnDi  JU  dJjJU 


»  }iavn  DKX.         2  jj^3,  ^.pj^  3  pi,  DP;  \i6  cett.         *  Om.  PX. 


110  ♦  (J\^\o^^JU»j   >-y^  ♦ 

dJL.  xJUij  ^_^  inia^D  CJTlJn  '•3  »J^j     ♦^JlJL^^II  ^  JS'\^  Jju  hJjlJIj  aim 
*^yb  ^'i   (.XiS   jJ^    ^j^-w»Xa:dl   ^J-:^-l'   ^Ju:   l^XL*    j^   dJi   J^aj    ^U    »il    Jj^.   HPN 

♦  aULllj  ^^JJL-J1  ,_y;Lju«  ^y  D^yB's  *aj  VB'sn  Dnna  Jyi 
(^UoLx;  iaXavO*   ^aJLc   c-^ilix?*  sJUwi^  o^*  2Ji3l  »^1L<  cJlioj  0 

JLjO^    (•^t^    {%ii^l    *-;;    JLc  A4*.   ju»l    J^lj   JXj   Ljo^^  *--iJ^   (sUXl  u^   jLftl 
J   ^^    ^^.   -^.^1    A^   ^y  (aUi   -^.t.,;«ij   pDVn  n^JD   3J3n  n^D  JjJi   ^^   <sUj 

s^l  (slLU  °^1  »--ia  Ix*  ^^j*  pDvn  ni>oi  3J3n  lijo^  cjJjJl.  Ixj,^!  u-^^SSj 

15  L^j^  jL*l  j^  (i^  |»4Jl  ^:*-o.  ^^  riB^n  n^Dj  njjn  l^o^j  ^LJCJI  j^a^  jJ 
csJJloj  v^l  (sULo  ^J\  Lijl  »-^^  oj^S  y/*^^  ""^  cJj-^  r*r^  ^'^  ^^  cr^ 
li-wi  J>J»  VIB'  pi  Jyj  ♦  ^;;-5C^l  ^  Jo.lj  J\  U^JL.  Jl»1j  J5  uJLL)!  jj^l 
IIaj  j^lj^  t.,9..^  cfJJl  3JJn  n^D  ijl^  JlT  5-.ltti  c^jJi  elUl  *L«j5^  ^^  Jo.lj  w\ 
<J^  (j?5^j  ly*^"  J^^^"^  "i^  *^2;  cr'J  '^-   "H^   ^^  ^i  iuL.j5^  j^  ;j--o,  ^J\S 

du^  ijl  ^  nn  i'B'DD  ^y^    ♦  pavn  ^i?©  JU;  (jyJX"  awn  ni^o  jjl  u.  jo/,  vb 

Jji  ^j   c^^l  e]Ju  jA  3JJn  n^D  Ijufc  u^  ^^jl\  J^  ^j   »^  J^  ^  ^jlj  ^r^i 

♦  ^  A3  elULo 


'  n^a  codd.         ''  pyoni  B;  cf.  p.  ^%  u.  4.  '  Perh.  add^.  *  HIB'^  Nini 

}N  )D  B;  om.  |D  cett.;  perh.  ^^y  '^  ^'^)  P;  m'i  C;  ^jy^  cett. 

P  2 


CVVC4  <j5C3i  ^^  jXS'\  j^^\mi^.  jMKJt^.  ^l^\j  U-^^  It^*"**  *^}^  *^    "  "^ 
'1J1  Tjj'y^  Jy  j^  3  L^j  ];_;£  c-^U  o^jL^l  °J1_^^-^  '131  ^y^aini  iJ^j's 

Jl5    Uj    U-*-tJ    ^^-~-^.    r-^^   djill    c/^lr*"    *^   c:«.^^*n'v   u^_jJ    u^    *~i/^    '^  "'^^    1*^^ 

'1J1  ni33  "itj'y  nx  inixini  Jls  U^n^3»n  isd  ^y  ^^j^^^jLa.! ^l«o  ^,  jj^  'iai  ^nnai  j.to'jw 

♦  ILi*«   ^^^Mj.  Lili   (sJJl*  »iil  J^^Jl   (^    JiSl'  »5JLo   (J  J^  w^  J>J^    (j-o   i^-*--ii 

mm  pp  prnJi  ^  Jydl  ^^  nma  ^i)D  iJjSj    ♦  diUl  Ji*  cu-jJij  ^^i^ju  icyi  »Jy 
Jyj    ♦  »pj-4-ii-*  ijpx»  sjU^lj  jLXJI  u'^^  ;^  ^"^  (sUij®  _^jj:5L-!^1  jaj  vry  pa 
^,.**.^  j_j9«  Lj/i  Lo  Jlc  0I4*  ^^^  ]^^  1^^  djlo^  ^,1  ei-y^a.  ^^-»  dDj  'IJI  b^D)  15 
niiavi  no^  mao  ^^xn  nx  ^n^xn  Jy»j  \niac  pi  nDsa  pj?!?y  n^ni  »J^  ^  py^yJl^ 
n5j>yi  Jl5^  NyiK  ^an  ta^K'n  n  i.^  JU  US^JUJl  ol^.^  ^^1  diL.^x:5C«^lj  nnaii 

j^     iJjJJ     (J«JL».      ^^      8^t     JlJ>.1     S^     ^j     JJ^     ^j^     sU-»Jj      >i-^      i;;-"     J^     f^^i     131T13 

I  ♦  JyJl  j^Uoj/no  Nin  Nnv  Nin  n^^Ul*^  Mdes. 

\^jju>^*    'UomJI    l^L^r^    <*>^b^    [•^xuilAS*    sXLo  ^^^.AuSCli    5»*y>5    cV-vC*  F        ao 


jjkj  M,  "  Om.  (apparently)  M.  ^  ^^^^^  C  K  P  Q  X.  «  1123  ^Npl  Heb. 

^   Ins.  C  only.  «  Om.  M.  «  C  only ;  ULJl  cett. 


Mdef. 
M  inc. 


— ^ —    J4/^  \j^  JW^'>*  J>*j  *-^-*'  *^^  (*-**^  J<4|r*^  (c^  c>^-  '^"'^^■^^  '^.  ^^  c>*  d^l 
'lii  nDy^  N\nn  nyni  UjI  Jy^  'i3i  nnN  pNi  Jls  US^^^jl-.  jb  j^  v;Ls*  ^1^ 

II  jJL-o    cjij    JL    »j>j>   i_j^   »jl    u_»J!jLi    DIN    nN1)03   jL3.1pl    ^^9   Jjjb    J-oiJl    Ijuk    jj    ^jl 

L»  (_*-*,.»  »\ijjk.s*  LftjjJj  ^W*-^  (V  A-*^  ^J^j  ^;^yj^l  lal^l  ^^  J-*j^j  ?/*^  u^ 

na  .a'?  'hi2    ^j-«    j,.il    ^^.    ^^wi    XS    dill    ^,1*   ilbU    ^,_>--»    ^^  jjIj   '^•'^    ^"^"'''   J^   ^^  »-:^A*^ 

15  »j,_^  ^^1    Jtj  JJI  ^^  ^  Jj-ir'^  u-*^'  L?JJ^*  ^i>iflxH''^^^>-X]l  IliaJl^^  l4jjuALt-« 

3  .ih  'to®    ♦  H*j   L£/i  ^j    »/4^  (^  »-i^  J^  <£l^i  J  J-»  '131  ri^fr<"^1  »J   J^5  '131  ^31"   nIj  JU»  »Ij\ 

ao  UaiJ   ^^ii.>   1  jyb   (vybUi>    ^^^   (JJi   eil)   Sf^\   UAjb.    jULuJL*  r 


1  Om.  M.  2     u,  M.  "  n3D  130  p^3  pB*  br\D  pt^  njN  C ;  using  this 

we  may  rewrite  the  whole  passage  thus :  jjJu*.  ,jfl-i**'  J-^  u*"****  *-^'  ij^  u^  J>^  ^J 
♦  »JL*jtJ  jjk  (jj^  ^jl  J-sr^^  i)  cjJLli  ^jli  iJLl^  t>^j  -J^l  1^  A-^i-"  ->-i-»-  *  Li^>^  M. 
^  sJijJl  M.  «  ^_^JI  M.         ''  ^j  . .  .  ^x>   ^J  £.  ^j^  J-^1  11*   J^j^  w>-^  jj 

(J  .  .  (sU  J  M  J  |N3»^N  Nnn  ^B  hp^JN  NIH  ^»m  |Dn^  Ch  Heb.  (boHJ  Q ;  SnO^  B  K ; 
^On"'  P X  ;   bon:  C).  «  M  corruptly :   s^LL  Jlc  Jyb  d^l  lijA  ieLJlj ;  for 

iiiLJlj  Heb,  have  J^W. 

Line  13,  libl. 

[II.  3-]  P 


Sjl^^II   J^  v*3■=^   ^   <^^   ^J^'   cJ^    *>^^-^   "-r*^   y*^   i^  sUu^  jjl   iwl    II  J-o^ 
ttUi    ^  j.-flJLll    ^^*  iyu^\j    Jjtr^L;    v-jj-^l    ,_,fljs^'  Jj^l   o^  UjU  iS  5 

L>.BJL^  O^ll/^^  »j^  t£/?^    ^j^  tiy^  ^)  sJJl   .Ui.  UJl  (Jlc  jj-i.j   dJl  ^^  Jj^l   \}j^ 
^jlS  Uj      ♦  (sUj   ^y  jLJ'j    cLo^l    iiUl    oJUx-i-l    dJi    (Jlc    Jjo    JijtJl  ^fJoJ    jj^ 

J>«J   i;r»   Jy  LS^  ^J   Cj:>\y>.  I40I   J^   ^^  Jjj   J^  ^  l^jti^  J\  J.--^  ili  JijJl 

r^^)  ci>**^j  pJ•'*L^H)  (•^■*^J  {S".y^  '^_y^-*^)  J^^  j^  ^  J-^  ^^j^  '^h 

(sJJabj  ^)y>y  z^-^-^j  1^^  ciAjt.,^  Uj  ^j^.  u^  ^rs^  cr*  (•-6^^  x-oLJl  a*—-?.  *^j 
^j*     ♦  ^yuxiW  »jui  ^jJ  »j>j  ^  iJiW*^  i4  ^J^  ij^  ^•i\j  JW^^>i  dJjij   Jolj.,-i. 

♦  ^\xs-\  c-A-a-^  (jJJl  Ui  'UJl  K-jic  ;_j^r^  iJjii*  dJd!  ^^15  lilj  *UlJ1  »_Jlc  ,^^5^^ 
°eUi  p  lili"  dJS^  _j\  v^"  J^  »^>1  lj>Ls*' jj*  UJ\  dM\  ^\  :^\}£,  ^  ^jU 

i_>lki^  jli,.   L^l    jjlj    jUJ    ^   jii.   jJl    ^Jlc   Jjo    (^jJl   Loj  »J   JwJ  x.jUlJ   &j».j    ^ 


^  Om.  X.            2  tj^jjj^j  codd.  ^  pj:'^^  B  K ;  ptT^NI  C  D  P  Q  X.         .  *  nJ3^ 

codd.        »  '3^5**  codd.  (byND^JN  C).  «  Om.  C  D  P  Q  X ;  ^NJn^  B.        '  isr  B  D  K. 

«  Perh.  ^y           »  np1^3D  X.  '°  v^ii*  M.            "  Om.  M.            "^  s-^jj  M ; 
mn^  }N  Heb.         "  U^  ji  M. 


Ill  ♦   (_J\^]OjJUjsj    T^y^   ♦ 

I  .  J-oi     U    ^    dJi    -y^    Jjj    ^UJ    *jJiJ^   \j'^\    dji-o    C-oo,^!    j^jlA*    ^y    ,^J^    ij^j    ^ 
r .  ^JyJ^  ^^   }v  nB'  'ij:^^'^   sJ^j  u-)^  U-^  *J^^   CT"    r/*^    (-5^   ^^"'  ""^^^    '^•'^^      *  '^'^• 

J  ,_^  »^Ui  JUi  ell  8^1  Ijl'  ^^b  Jj  vb:^^  (^  cj-^^  (2)Ji  JLtti  ana  Noi'n 

elUl  lift  ^^1  ^j>jKS  W'\^''  •IB'  J^Ur!-»  ^jl  ^^^  nantJ*  Jy^    *  ksi  JJLi-^*^ 

^jl  L-jJIxi  nv3i5D  yaiN  »j  ^y  ul  J.-.-t^j  *a^  j^Xaj  »i^  kai  DID  ^sijo  Jl  »J 
»jl^^.-j^l  (sUIl  Ijufc^^  Jj  ^\S  dLlUil  sjufc  J^  ^  ^^!x-»U-Li^  ij--^^  cH-J^ 

JwJI,-»*J     *1Jlc1    SJ,l^    ^jIj     J^LstS^    ijl     »^     t-rJ/S^    Jj*^^     *J^     C^-*    *^J"*     "^"^^     KJ^J 

15  aJ    L^yi^    C5*y!^    lJ<^UI    lAj^'^<>^    Lic>^l    jUw    ^^   bL  i  n 

Mdef.    Lp^y-*   J-^  J^    "^^^  (sllji    jji,^J:J  ]  Jl£    JwJLi-:^  ^\    spi  tXsJl    »J/t 

Jyj  »^  Jl  ^l::^'  U-«  \j>Jo  J"^^  ^ULs  L4A  c*Jl>  ^jl  ,_^j  ♦  »jj-«  ^1  n»n 
^  JUl  ^Ik  jtij  Jl  J-^*—  ^  sil  el'i  J  ^y-^  *  ixj^l  ^_5:jtj>  j  j^asjs* 
20  JijJl  M>^.  ^-i*^!-*-"*'  /» i  ■■■•  >j  ij^b^jiJ  ^1  Jux.)  VI  «oL*-ol  Jji  ^^j  ^'  jJJl  Jji 
jo-s^j  » '  *  >  (JJjJ  *i/^  ij*-^'  ''J^  u'  '^^  "^-^^  A*-^*  *-"«^  l*^^*  u^  J^  "-^J-J^ 
J-^i->—  L5^  *4A^^  CT*  <-H^  (^  l^^^  J*"""'^  -^  UJ^J  (•^^'  u^'  C>-^J  J^-«J' 
«  2c  *W-jV1  k_.^^L-j  1,^1  J  >«-olj-*  sic  J  (sUi  Upj  Ui  pi — j^lj  jW^ 
ex^.  dUi  >tJUJ  JJbJl   ijl^Uii  sDl  Jjt-^j  sJJl^J^^  Jy  ^^*  JJjJl  sj;j  U  UU 


»  1p3  Heb.  '^  ^  M.  '  Ulj  M  B.  *  ^^^-^j^  M.  »  Ix-iLo  M. 

°  JNnn^  codd.  ^  "jh  |D  D  K  X  ;  ^h  p^N  B  C  P  Q.  »  p3  B  C ;  nNimS  |0 

ny^  n^^JK  P  X ;  text  K. 


lA 


^D^D^  ^y»»  jji  ^f-*^^  (sJ^l  u*^   *  ujyjU  e^jj  dJj  j.jL«i  !^j  Ujj  »/I  ^Xflj 

♦  "^jprn^i  Jyi^  »JLiJj  »j^.  jj>l  sixJj 

^jl    ^^    Xi    ^j    ^(-^i5    L^5    !u«^  ^-»-j   Uii   (»)J    sJjSl    U    /«-*— Ij    eUlj    Ujs^    j1:l^1. 

A^  e^^Us:v^  ^^^\  jUUuJl.  i^a31  ey>^  U  o-^  c^^^  cJ^5  ''• 

<•  (J^W  i:/)^b.  o*vaS^  ^(jlj  ^^^  ^^  O^^  0*«^V^ 


M  B  (D^h  for  N^Jl);  text  D  K  P  X.  «  Om.  M.  «  nnntJ'N  B  K  X  ;  ^jo:-t.\ 

M  C  P.         "^  For  ^ill  (apparently)  M.  »  Om.  M. 


20 


^_yXc  ^__^i^*    (j>X5U^    ^^>Iaacul    7f(jJb    (JJl^   C?*^  SJULVacX/^''  cViCj  '« 

20  ♦  J^  ejus  jj  jUoiui*  ils  ^^9^  (cvyl>  (J  o^ Ji 

»Jji  Jiu  s.^.  ooj  tsim  Jo   ^1  ^;/^-^_J  &--J^  u*^^   jjl— jl  t-^^-j  eU-o  ^JU  (jK 


^  njy  C  M  X.  2  &^Ls*  M ;  nnnt3K30  P.  '  Om.  M.  *  ^BinOJO^  Heb. 

»   Om.  M.  '  »^Ll  M;   n3t:X3»  B;   nn3L5N3D  ^^y  C  K  P  X.  '  Ocs:^  M. 

•  t5^Jo.  M.  '  N^D  bis  p. 


♦  icU  8^  ^yLc  iiil^"'ja  hv  bTiJ  Jy 

^Js.  jLej   »4j».j    Jl*    ^^    ^IS    ^J^  °tSjj=*  (sUil  _^    Jj    »J^    (j\j  Ctli*   Jo   Iju*'        5 

*  t^^n^  ^_,x^>juO   (J>a^  15 

^yjiJoJ    JjLi.    ^J    u^C^   (sLJaiw   \jjt.^^   Jj«  j_5Lt-Jb   uylxxjl    ^_^   Jjl    ^^  ^Jli  ^JlJil 


'  ^_5:i:^/»J  all.  «  n>  fl1S31  B.  "  s5^— 11a  C  M  {Vsjt  and  [»]jo  lost); 

i?^  i""  T^JN  Nnn  K;  I^D^N  T^N  NIH  X.  *  Om.  CM.  »  Om.  MCDKX; 

ins.  B.  «  J^j  M.  ^  Om.  M. 


1  jj—U   J.*^^   (Ail   8^.^;i<o    ij^ljuLs    t-jLJ    iu-UJj    Lfe^Li    Jil^J    Iju*   J5j   |"icn   ?1p3    JU 
— ^^ —   ^,5jjL^  U5"  i_5^U   (^   »*Li>.^  !u^  dUjj  k-jjJl  (!i>jjjLjL*''  »jLJ  ^JJ5Cs  (jjJl  t_^ls^' 

5  J    ^_y^o   lysiy  o>,c>^i    py^b  ^>-^^    L^<:)>^j    cJWl<^   ^^    ^-^^^i^-^^  ^ 
♦  *UX:i.^l*  ^^  ^yi^^   f^-f^   0*ij   jUaIoC  ».iij  ^l^y^ii^^^IaXt^  W^a^. 

*ai  ^  jij^  ^1"  ^ji  '1^1  J  iX/  uiij  k.iji  jlc  d^i  ^  jj  »ji  jJlci 

iJLjLfrJl   »^^1    »lp.    %\j    »j1    uJj;!j«i   INNT   ^0^0^   b»0   "IK^N    J-aJI  ^1    ^    jl5    U 

DK  ^N"»   iib   Jl5   !u!il  ijyai\  \jij!i^   Jj  i:y^l  ]^  »■»»«»  iw^  JyJ.  J-»-l   ^^  (sJJi   ^^ii- 
rr  .3  moTU  N">''1    JU   Uj    Xxj    ^Jl    l^J^^i    *— ij^J    '*^    (••4-t^    cujtSji   Jill   yy^  Ij  <■»..«   *L>^1 

1 6  ♦  "lyiri  layn 

TJl»  J^  <-i^?.  (^5   ft^A^hsiV Jlix^^   i<>A  C^^ia^j  L-5c>-^    C^AX^   ^\^  -^ 

,^j  (jA*j  Lil  o.^.aj  Jl3  J  'iJi  i'N^Jl  ^JN  ^n^Nni  ^JJLdl  J^UJl  ^y  JU  Jj»» 
j^  US^»4*j  j;!a-»r^  jwlS^'wi  HEinj  nim  Jyj  a5^  »p  ^  (j^  Jj  »->  jj^  na 


^  Obi.  in  M.      2  nn:j'»  nnotj'D  c  k  x.      "  ^UJ . . .  m  (sUlj  ?).      "  t^-^^l  M; 

^33^N  Heb.  "^  sT^  om.  M.  «  Nloi?N  C  M  X.  ^  0^3^  K;   ^^  M; 

DniS?  cett.  *  Om.  M.  '  jj  M  (in  the  previous  line,  where  the  scribe  had 

commenced  by  mistake,  jJ»);  Tpl  Heb.  "  i—iyJL) — sJji.  M  only.  "  .li^l  M. 

O  2 


Ml 

K^icvi<     o^aLo     iSSiJi^     {^j^s\j^     \(j\»     e^^JaJj*    <^.f-^"!VC     e>l«iki*    e 

« TS1ND  nnn  JjJlS^^jI^  ^1  tqik         ^.^'dt 

C_>^1    JiaX^     (JXrO     M^J^jJJ     ^^yJ^^^  ^^-^^     {J^     (J^     jCC5La.«    1 

^1  JJ   J[S   Jbr^a.  ^jN  ^   (Tfij  Uj    Jlj^-a.  isUIl  11a  (_^   ^Jl   Jbo   ^j\  ,_^,  M 

iJjJ    JJLJi    «->UJ^    ^J^     (^     »-^^^     ^'"^^    L»^IjL-jj^    SJU     !iJ^^     iJv^     d^l     Ijufc    L_fi-o. 


*  Perh.  jjjtj.             2  Ins.  D  only.            '  ^X^dI^N  ^JCJ?  |0  yONI  n^3n!?K  JDNtJ'  ixi? 

'n^N  ''ba  B.        *  n^tri  PX;  nys-11  dk.  "  raiN  nn?  b.        «  ^xd^d— ^^sSjl-.^ 

om.  C  K  P  X  (ins.  M).              '  ^ji  om.  M.  «  ^^1  M.              »  ^HD  C ;   ^^  cett. 
"  »J^j  M. 


"  ^^    liXiJXj    L«    iJ    sJlII    (__fl.:iJ\j    ^jl    ^^1    uj*"        ''^^    LS^    (•J'^    u'    !U-JJ    j»jJli    J-jt) 

»j^  8-151  t^  jU*.  L«  jjl  8J>  j^i  sJl  lIj-"^  ilJ'*^^    i:^  y"'  1*^  i^'  "^^  c^  »-~>iJ 

*Ij^1     ^j-»    J     ^jjij    L.    j_^    l^Ltii    ^;0     1^1    A.lO.^1     jju*     ^^    ^Ij^l     »ju9>    ^^    *JLI-el    L^l 

10  (•J^'*  u^  ^   ^^    "^   *-''^'    fci-iJ   L«   J   t—LiXil    ^jl    Juq   (sUi   JJi-»   ^Jl   A^jj   i--<»Ul 
8J    J-aii)   "Iti'ai   sJ^   ci>^    u'  J>^    a**^   J>"^'   '"J^   (V   J^>'^   *-^   u**-A»  ^J^J   »-*J^ 

LJl5  ^'  Iju*  ^   Ui  ajLUI  ^-i^  il  ^^,-.-.  J^lS  Jlj  ijli      ♦  sliiJl  j_yJl  DIIVD  IBD^ 

dJ^jyJ    ^^^   !/^j  (slU-»Jl  ^^.  j_2^  u*»^j  °'yoi  ,_5ll-»J   elU—^lj  yJUaJV'^  ^,1   J 
N3  .N'  •\i-yoi  'iji  "ip3i  |Nsn  »jjo  JUj  o  hrh  ins  iB'a  ni»N  nnxi  p:-  Jj--pi  Jy  ^j  ,jIj4  eUi 

o    *^lj  ^^iJl    J-i^   1C*3    dU-Jl    ^jl    jLc    (»)LJi    JjJ    dU^l  ^^    o  ybj    ^  ^s» 

lb .«' 'TOa  di) jij  DiTJK'  pa  uniy  ntran  J^jii^ntj'n  tfji-J!  ^^j!;!-.  »Jl  (^  !>il  iB'a^UJl  JiU- 

T.r'-ip  JJJ   li  ^y»  ilij   Nin  1B>a33  1»T  "iB'n  b  tJ'DJ  ^3  J^i^ijla^Jl    a^  ylkJl    A^" 

21  ^j\  jysi   er^    u^'   ^^   ^  "'^^   S-..-1"   ijl^^^    Ji"   ^J!    dU    jjL.    jJii   dlli    J^ 

x^   ^Q    ijN    N3   vh   P^l   "IB'ni    JLolj    Jj^.    iJlil    (^    *JK^^    j^ikj    ^^    U^U    "^s^ 

♦  ij:-*.  JJL*    -JJJ.1  ^JLJ    Jjj  sJ^  j-Jlc  a-,j!^   i^^l^lj   JULc  &JDI   -r^.J^  c!>J 


^  nxt:iv3o  B.  2  ^^y^^  Q .  pjjrii,  -,l3J^^f^  s  om.  K  X.  *  ijysn 

D  K  P  X.  »  pii'pC^N  ponoijK  ins.  after  iJUl  B  K.  "  DH^^aD  NDS  B  K. 

'  POI^^  BK.  «  Perh.     4JUL..  »  Ins.  C  only.  ^^  Om.  C  X. 


Ins.  D  only.  "  ~^^^  ^^^^  INVn^JN  b  B. 

Om.  PX. 

[n.3.]  O 


'*  Om.  PX. 


j^i*J    nbi:  "QT   Jj5j      ♦  *liiil    J-fliJl    jjj    </ijl>    u.    j,XSj    U^^,aA.?lb    s-Jik)     I  .  J-ai 

nain  riDNi  Jls  j    ♦j^y.^^  ^jl^U  j^o^^Joi  J  «j>^  jli-^j  ji«  ^^  J^  i  j^-^ 

Ijtjfc^   L^3    pTnJl    (j--.^   ^^   ^j    |»Li\.1   (j»Jij».   ^^  y6   ,j^    s^U*    ^JLc    J^  Xi^         '* 

j^l  iWJJ\  sjufc  ^5i  cyljtij   >i^\  »jl  (sUij  npnm  nnyn  nNn»i  _^.>.>»ij  ^  dJi 
ixjj^lj  riDN  3nD3  Ditrnn  nx  *]^  n^jN  i^ax  Uj^.^  LoIiJI  ll^i  jo.lj  *  *  *  ULjw  5 
Jls    ♦  nvNtJ'Di'3  io{j>  ntJ'K  Jyj  Jj  iDt}>  Nipj  nti'N  JLs^    ♦  ^^  n^ax  noK  nnyi 

Ulj  OHN   jjj5G    jjl  Ul    b)!}    Nn^f  ^    -^   ^^jo    hiJ    NnVI   Jl5    J      ♦  ,_^_^  jAj 

li?  nju^  nnn  na  pni  Jy^    « i^jon  lai^na  nti'yi  ^  «j»y-tJL«.  uriJNy»B»  ^J^_  J\  10 

eUi  ^^;^   ^J^^   jlinJI  jjij   »^   (^jJl  HNIDJI  --^j   pXiiXJ   (JJJI    pliUCil   -^  Jj^ 

ij^  n^yajj'  D^yaB'  j^^  ^.l-^l  sIa  ^J^,  ^Jl  c?,_j\  d^o^  D^yaB>  n\:^b^  Jy^  l^^ 
'L-i,!^  ij3Nn»  ^n^M  JLs  j»i    ♦  d>o^  JU  dUlii  j»i:?i  »ju»,j  ^;;^^Ju-  ^\^V{i\}  dUb* 

c)^  j-.il  J^  ^^  J  X)  5_^J  ^jlT  ii  ninion  jJi  ^  JUj  ^^  ^\^\  ^^  20 
jjj  aSlj  jJ  il  ^a  fjN  N3  i6  rJlj  -iK'nJl  ^  JUj    ♦  duSLil  dLo^jJl  jJJ  j^b  ^  sjl 

^^U    idxJj    It^>^*-j    J_jJi->    »-o^lj  jl5LiJi*  jl  ^■^■itjJI  J-J*.    Jib    iul5C9      ♦  iLsl    8^?^ 
»jl  buic  J^j  ^n3D  ^^5  niDi  JyiT^^lj   ^^jJl  ^   J     ♦  d^SUll   ^^  Ui.   J5b 


^  B:  nnDyn  hb  n^iayn  . .  bn  no  , .  (nb^  hb  K)  nbx  nd.  "^^i^^aj  om. 

D  K  X.  3  Q^,^  ,-,  B_  4  nxaC'D^N  b^l  nN3NK'3i?N  D.  ^  j^C,  ^  jj_  ^^ 


Line  5.  %'xAy  6.  J^.  I4-  *^ 


etc. 


rvijj^li  JJajj    ^xaJl    i3^1j    jJuJl    ^j    ^.  jXe.    (sUi    [jixi    Oi    ^j^l    '^1    ^j    jJuJl 

j_^  Do^ty^^a...^  (jjJl  jJUl  Iju*  Jl£  ^v  non  nnn  <o>  .>j^  coib^  i^y  inn  Jyj 

t_aij   jj\  Xiji  ^JO   »j^  Jjfcl   (j-»  JLoljJ  Iju*   »JL)I  ^— ^j      ♦  *-'J!/*-*^i   J^j/-^  ciJ-?^ 
lo  cjlS"*  US'   *4JU.    JU:    ijjA^'    u^  J>^-    U^  "^^    ^^    f>*;j    u->i^^   »;Uc    ^^ 

^LolcV^    (.JLiiJljsl    c^Ua^    U^^    i^Xc    {JXr,  Sj    (.^Ji    zUaj^    ^-»   I   I . 
*^*     >-^^^   U^^5     oUaacOl     CJL:*.*   ^^^AoLiJaii    8Uuuo\     (^^♦'^    L^c^-^^ 
15  «^^^tiXli   (^  sJ   (•'^^^  oUaicOi 

Xj    »D1    i\j\    U     AL  * » y.    S-iisli-j    °liiJ^    J^^^    U^.>^    ^-^^    ^^"^^    L5*    C^^    *"^/* 

ly    »j;^^^\  Uj   s-JlS  ii^J^  r}^  ijlS'^Lijlj  "lOy  ^3D  D31  "•»  J^jii^^'ljjJl  ^j  Lc  JJLfi 

21  sil   *j      «  j^^r^l    »->    -Xai  Uj   "^y^r   (Jl  A^^l    p^jij  jJ-Ji   i->2/^    (J-*    CiJ^   ^-*^ 

U  Jlc  ^j.,^,jr.::,.>. >  ^jli  jJl   eUi.  t.^i'>  (^  U^  sJJI   J^ *..l   ^y^^^  ^^^ljlJI  ^j  jj^l 


J  .N  NIW 


^  nbvN  (1.  nijvs)  B.         ^  ,j_^  j^g  c.  qj^  (,et<.^         s  ^y^  g  ^f^^  Ijilj);  ^"53* 

cett.  *  13K3  C.  '^  'd  nbJ  CD.  "  |N  C ;  HJN  cett.  Perh.  ^.  '  ijfntJ'ni  B ; 
r\ip\>  N^^N  p^yni  NV^N  '\A^  ('N  nn^p  D ;  Nli^N  om.  C)  C  D  K  P  X.  B  is  very  different 
in  this  paragraph ;  e.  g.  the  third  and  fourth  citations  are  in  inverted  order. 

Line  4.  Uj*,  ^j «.»^H . 


j^U^  gjL.  ^jt,^  '131  D^B'B'  D^yn^'i  JU  J    ♦  nynsj*  a^yic^  Jl3  dJj  ^j  i:^  ^:r^.}i    ^  J-^ 
^^!Uj    xj^lj  ijL-,  iiLo  xj,l   ^j^l  dLL.  )iu^7\^  Dita^ta  'U.  ^^\  Jl  ^yUl  o.„.  .11  '"' Jj-^ 
pini  3im  Jjjj    ♦  °iiXi.l  sJuk  jj^  L^U^  ^Jl  o^Lij^.  ("^vH  u'  «— i]Jjti    *  i^;—        ^^ 

pIVni   J^j      ♦  »^j   JjJiJl   ^^    *lSCl.il|   iUil   !iJ   Jo^   pin   Jjij    j,l^JJ   cyLj>,   ^ykj 

♦  'iJi  vm  pHN  p-ip  nr  U-j  JU  ^_^l  hia  jna  nnj»  Jl  u.  ^^--io  wl  J-j  o^nyn    r  .1  snpi 
^j    ♦  '131  nrr'vnD  iJ^lT  ,_5.^L>  L^i-ajj  sljjLJb  14*^  ^Jl  «^u.^  ^^  cny  Jl5j  6 

»^j     (•Xftll    ^A.«t.Vl   IJkA     JtW.P.:>     9y^    Qt'^'^S    r^-ft^^'    *'^    'LaJul    Xl£-    fj\    >-jJc   'l31 

jjj  J  (j^  ^^i*j  1^  pNi  Jj5j    ♦  ^.jJ.1  ^^  inaJl  Jljj  ^j  n^33  h^k'd  ^y  Jyj 

°»Jyj      ♦  DID^D   ^   ^jPl^X-^  J^^r^^.'  ^^'^  ^^^^  W1   sJ^j      *  n3  11DNT  ly  iny 
Ijukj      ♦  ifcJLs^   j_5ijtj   »J^   J:JL11   Jaq    J^];-~J   ^J^   ^J^^    ^JJo^   w,   Jo^j   fl^Cn  IVpl 

ju(bbL*  ^   L*  Jii:   niDOitJ'   niiiT  nyi    dW^  ^y-Ji    313    vj^'  i_^j°  vj^il  15 


Mnn  K  PX;  om.  B.            23  only.   ^^^  gg^t  s  jy^  _  _  j^  ^^^^  ^j^   jj;^, 

*  Npn''  K  p  X.          e  ini  codd.          «  nnn  b.  ^  ^^ni  k  x.        * «  tJ'niriD^ 

KPX.               »  nnxi  yuDN  ••b  b.              "  ••iD  ND^s  B.              "  Om.  KX. 
"  W  C. 


1 .1 


♦  ^Lo1l>    JLx*    ^j^    * 


M 

U  ^^.  ooI$^8J;LjJ1  ^^  'p  'p  nti'Dh  ^^J*  'y  's  N^nn^  ^^.*  N^nji  pm  Dnnh 


^!  j»3.^lw4)^.  AjJj  o\Ly,^^  cUa^I  ^^H^  ^^  cw^^  <-i>^  ''* 
A£s^   (,y.AJLv4  oA-JJi  ^^yfc    jtyoUwU   ^«jol^l    jw^Ajij    jU>sX2w    ^yyu«^ 

S^.cAU    8^    0*»^^    ^yS*^^    A^aJU>*    fi^Ax»l    (;>aXoo4    (__5Ail    t)Jt>*   fi 
lo  (^>^jsv3\->  (jlX^.I^s   •!)  vS^^^  LiW=*J^  jkiAJ^sOl  o^sui  cSjtuJb,  o^cvi3|* 
*  cyLii»ii.4Xu4^  [(^5^1  zUlaiix^  ^ri^=^^  "'Uaiijjl  cJ^' 

TT'n  '•i'3    *-•    li^lU    :>\:>j\    »j   J^   ^''K'ni'   sJ^j      ♦  »JL11   JJLc   ^^    »^jy*    '^^.    »-»^ 

jjkj  nnB'iDn  job'j  ^>— —'  ^4^  ^n:  pa  Jl  u.  ^^-^  n^aj  n*K>o  ny  i.\y^    ♦  "r 
3  .j''  'pm'  Jl5   -4^j  D^nno  m  p^nnaj  j^^U"  nmnn  ^aan^  j^^^^^^'  i^j  ^^Ul*^ 

b  .3:  'dt  Li-i"    ^^-iH'-^*"    aJUjj-    ^^    i^^-*    ^^J^^i^J    *-^    '-^i^^    'i^    iJLaJl    (X^)    WB'  DJB'l 

so    X.«mJ     ISiji    ri.l  tfv     UlJjLo    (_pi)^    AJLgjj     ^_p4U.\jJ     AJLm<>     AJLmi      ^j.<OO.I*     rt.H » ■■>     ^Jb      J^.LJ 


*  Dnpn  ND  jn-JT  B.  '  iia  '•SS  mx  B.  »  Sic.  *  Supplied  from  B.  »  <>£>) 
r\iipM6ii  p^i  B.  «  JJDpn  K  P  X.  ''  NVpJsi'KI  K  P  X.  «  nstrni  B.  »  n^K'D  X, 
HTO'D  K.  "  nbjN— nna  B;  ^ijwn— ma^  KPX.  "  The  passage  which 

follows  is  corrupt  in  codd.:  NONS— n3B>3  bi<p  Dn^SI  IVNJnai  DHN^aNS  X;  KP 
nearly  the  same  (NJ''p7N  NINS  P);  a.^b-H — ,%4-v^j  and  aSm  ^^p^JLc.  lilj  om.  B. 
"  Om.  K  X. 

Line  i8.  ^jjl^\. 


♦  ^\^it>     Jtuu    Ti'J^  * 


Jii  jdj  b'lyaB'  fi'iyutJ'  J-^-»-aj  ^  IJl^j  ^^J\  eUi  ^^-^^^^  *-::--)  j^^-^Uj  iplj^^    i  J«aJ 

Lo   ^    L^JiJai   JJ.   A.;.^    ^^^.^ju-mJj    ajLo    jo.l    dJi   aJl,j>.    ^JJ5o    pDlDti'    ^^.^■I m    ^^\^\ 

iJL«  djL«  jo.l   x^  L»  J>±*  »JJ1  j^  Aii5  sil  Jo o  "jDy  7v  ^n^3  sJ^j     *  jjo  5 

cohy  pn^f  N^anh  Jy  ^j>^^  »^j  J^  »;>^  »^b5^^  P^  '^^^''^  '^^'^'^  '^""''^ 
Ujl*^  ^!liil  JJl  ^^  jA  U  iLJl  »1a  ^^  n^tj'ip  tj'ip  HK'oh  N^aji  prn  Dinniji  lo 
11*  ctnp  trnp  ntJ'Dh  n"'»hj?  piv  N''3nh  iJ^  i^-,  ajU  «jiJlj  si*  j^o  y*  L* 
VB'Dn  Nb^  Uj  ^^Ijb  elLLo  ^y^  N''331  }im  Dnn^l  L.1^  o.a-..H  *bj  JU.  JJl  ^^ 
VB'sn  N!?3h  Jjjii  ♦  JjU  ^^1^  i;^-*--J^  ^y  ^  isJ'Jj  pv  "is^ij^  "Ntsn  cnnh 
U  ^4i  DNton  Dnnh  Ul^  ♦  nuyinJl  ^^  I4--.JU.  Uj  Dnnx  dni^n  miny  »->  o^i^ 
j^l  LjyjJl  yL,  }iy  laah  ^_5»  J^jjj     ♦  ^\^%  J"^^  i^liX\  ^Ij^l  ^1  ^^iS'is 

JwaJ  J-Jj  ♦  d^^lj  J];-*^^  ^W^  rlj-'^^  ty  U**-^^  ^  j»  ft '"•«>.  u-^^  iJ-"  (.?/?' 
Jl  Jjb  ^  j^jT^  ijl  dJl>  ^];lj  «  c)^^-«J'  (>*-  t/  J^  P^  "'^^^^  4>^J  "^^ 
^y  ^1   (»_jLfl-»   *4^^.i  i^a.   ^^  »^-jj»^«,l  Lb  *4-:-»  &JJ1   (c^^^^—^  Jj.^.   'sJJu   *LaJjl 

Jl  »j  ^,.i^^  8i\  j.y  JUi  D^D^y  pn^  s^nnh  Jy^     ♦  n^nin2tj>  nx  psn  nnn  m  .i"?  .a  n"T 
J^j    ♦  ili^y  t^ljJiil  Jl'  <jj^,.*jlj>  D'-K'np  BHp  nK'Di'i  Jy  ^jlj  h'hrM  Dona  20 

L.  ^^1**  ^J  j^  pfnJU  J^J^--j  ^^.  i;;-o  *LwJ^!j  pinJl  ^i^jjfcj  prn  nnniji  jo,^ 
t^jj  Lo  jA  N-iniJlj"  niTTiyJl  ^^  c^^j  ^/=::;^  '^^  »^f^J^-^  m  W^^ 
l^^j  HD^tJ'  ijU;  (^  ootkijl  L4JI  "UUl  ^jiio,  jjLxj  unpn  nn  L*li    ♦  °»^  25 


^  ^jL^  supplied  from  B.       ^  _iJl  supplied  from  B.        '  D^BHp — ^J\  supplied  from 
B;  om.  cett.         *  HDN^NI  codd.  ^  nnpl^  N3jn^  ""n^N  inS  N^aj^N  NDNl  B. 

Line  18.  IsLl*.  25.  lyiJj- 


1»  ♦  <JU>lt>^;Xou    p.^    ♦ 

♦^jla^l  ^9  (•4*^  cJ^*^^  >^^^  C^ll^Xjii^  (Ja^ 
i3.2D'»tt,«    l^   ^6:c   i_,l^^P  ,_^    *j-   sill    JJLe  lyl^(jjJl    ^_yiJlj   mys  '•JNI  INIp''   QILJ 

^^1  ^^  ^XiJ  L.  Jl^^-iJ  pnni  nmn  pni  Jy^    ♦  aJ^liil  Jl^lj  u-«^'  Jl^*' 

^\JLiXw;^J^  iksOi^  (J\^y  ((v^^  (fl^j^  r^^  <-^^  r>^^  o*m^ 

80  ULWcji   ^^-^^^    <.^>^^  ^;kAl    (•>^'?'==^)^  ^y^t)J^   cJ<>c    N^la.^  •     «  (_^c>^^ 


^  IDN  B;  n^sn  KPX.  «  N3Q1  B.  ^  Nt3n^N  (sic)  PX.  «  Different 

numbers  in  B:  Chaldees  51,  Persians  67,  Greeks  180,  Romans  192. 

Line  11.  La-aj ;  cp.  Weight,  Ar,  Gr.  ii.  §  136  a. 
N  2 


(j^^  J\y^rM  ^^anoi  Jyj    ♦  b^iyn  ban  '>v  njn  jr-^  J^  j-^.  "^^"^^  »Jy        '  J-*^ 
(>**  i/  v^  Jy  J^  J^^rt^  TiKon  m^noi  Jy^    ♦  u^Ldl  jjx«jj^  J!>*^'  r.^^U 
^riNDH  J^j     ♦  i:^nnN  mjiyai  ^;*1;  ^^^""V^  ^^^'^n  UJjl  sJU  y^c  Lx--«  vyD!       "" 

^nNOn  JlS  8Jl  J^j     ♦  ^DNOn  JU  dJlls  °8J^^^"  ». i ;.!  JJifi  lij"  sjjJlj  si:?^ 

^^   |.4^   X^_   <^>   j.4j^  lUl   ^^   ""l^A^.   ^   j,.l    ^.   jT^l"   O^    ^ 

c,.--^.  ,yju  \n^N  K>np  in  ^y  Jy^    ♦  °^J^:i)!  jj  J^LJ  j^uJi  J^y^J  u^  »-^^ 

♦  ^e*^l  u"'^  J-^«^  Jto 

djjij    «  ii^LJ!  ^1  Jl  n^j^'sriNi  ^^  ^  uTsXaJl  ^.^.  n^ani  nm»  Jy 
^;-«UJj  eUi  eJiJ  djL-  ^  ^j  ciJJl  jnnJl  J-^j  J\  j.^^^  rhnT\i  prnn  ^n-iNi  "it^N 
b\/r\ii  Ijuij  sj  jj-ol  jj  JLib  ^jl5^  «>J1  sJLxj  iwl  ^«i  jjNnaj  -idn-ii  xip'-i  »Jy5^i5 
^^J^rt^  ij=^^  dj^"  p^  L?JJ1  inDJl  j,ljJ  lysj  t^jJl  J^l^j  a5oM1  iJu^  i^  _^ 

nya  '•i'N  yaw  Jy^'*    ♦  °i^^^."  ^_^_  ^jy^n  Jy^    ♦  siaiy^  o^ntj'ni  JU  U^''  Uj      a.i'sw* 
Ujjo  ^y  JUj  o^^  »^  J^  »J^  r»y  J^  '^--^^  "^^j  »*W  »^1  "-jj^  ^■'y  rim» 
^  any  nmDj    ♦  n^^ansi  dJi  v»-ju:1  ^*  ^_;^1  x^L,  J^  ^^yC  ^^1  c^^l  jj^j  19, 
%^i  As6  t5JJIj  inmo  ^JNi  !j3n  i^Ni  Jyi^^b^  U;w^-~jj  nrao  U)  ^j^  nny  nhy      t.t'nii 
*  3iy  n^Jiy  Jl  w  ^^-^.  any  nmD  ^sd  hnj^d  »Jy  eUji^  |n^n^n»i  ijn^  nnDno  a  .nop  'brrn 


*  Om.  KX.        2  fjya^  KPX;  text  B.        »  nDD3  TISN  Ninsm  B.        *  Om.  B  K. 
"  NHjy  (codd.)— Koh  om.  P.  «  |NDJN  pb^  D>!?  IN  B.  ''  ^HD^  B  (and  nvp3). 

"  HNlfy^N  ^b  ">3J^  only  B.  »  "T-XDnO  B.  ^°  anJ^N  B.  "  'Om.  BX, 

"  iie,^— U^om.  X.  ^'  mon  B.  "  'lp3  X. 

Line  6.  sjjJl.. 


IV  jj^li  gjL^i  j^^  ^^^  ,j^x  iy,2^  jy^    «  vjW;^;  »j,Ui:  L,.-*-  M  ^j^l  T^B  "^Nni  »Jyj 

^^  lx»    i_5»_y^j   iiJjJll    ^lixil   Jj^UJI   ^  ^'i>   »J^    ♦   i^jSV.    i^'-fttl^x    (SU^   »-J^    (^U^ 

J^jL-^j  Ia^:x>m.)  iJjjJ.1  (j^  .s^  ,_;-JwiJl  Ji'i^  il^lj  iijjJ.1  A«^j  v^JiiJl  ^J^lBJl 

Uj>Li»:^4;tu»/o    JaiL    *^^1*A£   ^^^    A*«wU    t^lsu-^   ^y^^^   ^-   c)^   "" 

(;>Acw,U3  e>sO  Ux3lt>c  ^_^  u*»<y  t/^  ^<s^  <^-JkJoJ\  (^Jt^  (_5'^'  '^-^.cAN 

»,^1]1     IJ^^J     ll^rfig     JlS     li^     (SLJI      Sy-i^''    Ji.L»^     Uljljlj     LXLiJ      ,j«^      sJjiV 

♦  LjljJb  ^a-,1^  \:»n>^U  5^-Ji5Jl  (sU.^  ^Jlc  LlSli^'  ^^^ 

«Jjii    *  n3>B>pn  JU  J  nn^D  JU  J  nyctj^  JUi    ♦  nyoty  -"V  Jyb  »j!!)L9  ^ 

^,jljo  ny^pn  Jy^*    «  IjjjjU  -i-»lj  Llj  J^  Uj  LJU.  i.^^5Ci  x^\  ^jj^j  nyoB> 

n^yo!?  sJyj     «  du-jJj  (sb-:jx«j  eUlil  ,_^:jt^  ^  yjt^  HB'yi  JlS  J  UcJJLij  ^Jl  ^_^1 

E3  .na  'dt  n^by  ^CB'  N-ip3  iC'K  "»^y3  nan  ^a  oJi»  US'  duujxo  jLc  ^ysx*  (sU-l  ^J^  ^y.30  ""n^x 

2oUjjJi    Joju    ilj    eU-l    J-*.il   J-^U    i'N'itJ'*  \ni'N   JUj   elU— 1   dJlS^   'iJi  *a3N 

*  cy^^^  O^tvii  J^Ai^  oxAAiK^  ^J^^^  C>j)\  p.W  c^t/^  ^^J^ 

1  Perh.  JU  lulST  2  ynv3  codd.  «  NJN^an  BKX;  text  P.  *  B:  na^tj'pn 
lODK  nhai  'iii  njn  ^a  p''Da  iok^  |y»^  inik  n^yc^  'ipi . .  ^nxynvn  "hi^  ivN  ^jy^ 
^DDN  ^3N^  wyo  ^oyNs  ^v  oy  i'sp'*  ^nSN  ''^y. 

Line  4.  Ij^i*.  11.  L»^. 

[11.3.]  N 


*  cJyOlO   wjUw  p^y^  * 


11 


♦  Ujluj^  UaL^I  r»t^^  ^<^  (J^  U«*x»l  (^  c>^^*«c«  20.4J  'jjo-ii  5 

♦  bXJlj  l-ajL-^I  ^^  A^^b  J^  ^v'^J  v-^JJi  J^J^JtJ  tj*  (_5*^^  ^''^^  ^'^  LS^^ 

«  ijyKH  ijNtan  Jyi^  ^r^^^. 

sJ^j  ♦  sJ^  J.4  ^ncn  s-l^j  (_^jJiJl  ajljx*  ^c^^l  S-iJjJ.1  L_jl;.»-  j-a»  "iDX  Jlii  "jrittni 
■jny  HM  irni3iyni  nBin^  D^t^n^  ^n^^  iJ''Nt2n3  ""a  ,^51^0  i^nuN  nuiyai  U'-Nunn  ••3 
^.  Jp  Uj  riDin  J.*j|^,-~j  'j;^j  la,v.>i.,.-vi|j  U-i^^  nsin  D^ti'n^  uy,Lai  naini? 
jtJ  iJJl   ^j^  j^  5J^  aJ^^Ij  j>JLJ1    iij     ♦  (•^J^.   ^J-*   (•-^J/K)   '^J^^i   *UlJ1   ^j. 

sslcpoJ  JL  .^Imc  iJ^sJwvs  ^)1  UaNjJI  U  Oj  U  jA^o^i  t/^^  1^ 
JjSj  n^sn  B'pn^  ^  Uj^  t^JJ'  ^^^^\  *->^l  J^  m  ^^^j-^^.  V^v  ni^sn  I^n  Jy 

^  abii  N^D  N»  P.  '^  NJn-'JN  B. 

Line  2.  ,^wJi-s^'. 


S  Jw^     ^DQ    HB'y    ntJ'S    K'^Xn    "l"ns    U^    JU    ^_^1    ^    H^nJI    »1aj     ♦  csbliT  ^y    i,^^\ 

'  ^j--^  iM^N  ^1^  nnnn  inny^  Jyj  ^Ul  1^1^  (jj-.U  ^-^^  ^_5l5^1  ^.U^j  ^v  nnyin  naoni 

vi.n'ian  ^^  >Lk5  (jjJl  2N10  nmy  nnni  '•ro  in  nna  Jl^^^^^.  nync'm  J^j    ♦  in^sn^ 

J-ai  jjk  nvu'kj'ni  Jyj  'iii  B^sn  nnN  J-^  Jl  m  ^^-:^  n^Nn  dy  jr;i5G  'b>l 

♦  »^/Sil  niyiJl  ^;^  *W^^  M  L>j^ly  U  Jl  m  ^^-^  nan  nx  opn  Jyi 
Jl^>j-ij>  D"'DK^n  i?3  nnn  nncj'yj  n^  nc'N  Jy^    ♦  jXlb  L^l  oJLa.  dJJli  Ju^iJl 

^.^^y  OolS^^jJi   ^J\^    p4-J^    j^.l   Jj    jr4-iJaJ    j^li   (sUi  J^   *b^l   i_i.slj    ^^iS^jJ 

J .-::  unr  ^  u^  H/^  (^    *  i:^Jiy»  noD^  n2K-'n  irn^x  nns  'a  3  1^  Jyi^  dJ j  ^^  ^^ 

b  .23  'pn'  t/  u:^^  [J  ^_5^  incNn  i''3::'n^i  Jy^    *  aj^l  ^Uj^  nnj  nnia  b«n  cno  tj'pnsi 
20  *  (j^Lll.  .>j4JiJl  ^^  ^-^-A*^  ^  tg^^-*-^'  u^  p~^^  LiXi  »-Jx  b-iijlj  L« 

o  ^l^j    ♦  j^^jLiijjUP-  jjj    i^  jj  yy^j  jj  Li.  ^_5:l«j  nynn  ^y  >v  npjr^i  JU 


NnxajNi  B. 


^j  j^^\  Jlc  Ljla.  ^  *Lo^'l  ^ji  ^-y«i  [D^N^ijn  vi3y  *i^a  irn^N  ^v  hpn  ^jpDty 

ijai  ?iij?ni  n»nnn  niin  riNt  Jj5lll  (^^s  Jlij  nm»^  rhwb  nnin  nsr  ^;;-oj^l  ^ 
riNT  nv"i5fn  wa  b^  minn  nxr  mi'i\n  nnin  nsr  ci^L-Ls^'  |  ^J  JUj  n^n  trsj  Mdef. 

:  nrn  nmn  lo 

tMc   (_^Ajo*^   2Wt^;-*5!<   ^f    jo*.x5Ct!    2J^LuK«3U    2J^|^-sx)l    UaIc    e:vy«a>li 

^.      (*4-^     ia-i-"     J-==^      (J     i^     J^j/"-?.     isL-j!     ^\      !U     jL-ajJl      ^^^     ^^^J^.*.iJ      ^^.*i.Ls.   15 

^jl   Li^ji    JJLJ   J^'   JLls   [j^]  Lli    i_jjjjj\    ^j^    dih  j^^    ^J^3^^   "W-C    j,-^!    Uai. 
iLill   dJ^l    l^ls:^'    dJjJj    ^1^5    ^n    b    »^1    lyUjli    kii    sJUl    Jj.    jl:«J^    Juoq    J 

v_JC5;Jj  ^jUj!yi  j^^jq  J  (j-6  LL-.!^!  j^  j^l  (^5o  Jli  n3ii  Dvn  wi^y  nnh  Jji.^  19 

N^  D^jnsn  JUj  ^B^np  i^bn^i  >min  iDcn  n^jna  JjiS^  *4^l^  ^y  u^  J^  jCsj\   1=  -23  'pirr 

•nay  bi^-w^  bi  JU  dJlii  d>TN^33i  Dn^jna  cnnt*^  Dn-'si'D  n»n  dy^  >v  .tn  nnx  i3i.n.i'nv 

llTiin   DN  "l3^?tJ'''1    iJjii    j^^Is   (^.U».    U^jLllj   1.^   L    JlC   I^U.    ^_^1jo   TTIlin    nX     l3.n'Dn3 

Jj>.l  cr°  u^  *— lJW  sJ^  ■i^'=-\j    *  (£]ijL-j.il  Jo  ^Jlc  dD_ji  (JUi  IjjU.  j^^ijo  dij  •"-inx 


^  L-^j  (sic)  M;  NJnN3  Heb.  '^  Om.  Heb.  ^  The  bracketed  words  om. 

Heb.  *  Om.  Heb.;  perh.  ^L^^l.  ^  vbn  ^vh  '•n  Jjii  add.  B.  «  n^i? 

ins.  P. 

Line  3.  Lst^o-o. 


"j^^^  D^pimn^  D^ninpn  Jy_j     ♦  i^riNtan  ^vna  p»cn  JU  U^J^J,--j  ^^  ^^  Joi;! 
^  -^^  '■'^"'  5^-ijtJl   ^j  °  J-^jo   ^L*;   ^^^  1^'   t5JJ|^   ^T^   ^;^*^   [jJ^^   (JJJI  «->   jj^l   »jl    J-J^ 

N'  .n  'oT  n^3i  ^N")5y^  nn  inan  JU^  min^  r\^2\  bir\^'>  n^n  '•3  nn  nm  ^3  JU  US^u.  lytioi 
(^<>^\   UJ\->^j)j   Uil^.^A   U5lli   vysf.^\  LSy^  ^   <r^   W.  " 

JLiiy  pllJi  Jl  M^r-^  ij^nush  Jy  ij^Cj  ijntrh  u^a^n^  »JyJ  i!l'^\  J>\y>. 

N'.n'in'   JUj'  Jl!!   Jjtij   ^^.Ui^^^jj   »jUl   &jl  Uj.1   »^^  '"131  '•JpTO  IT^N  D^V3Bn  Jy  JJU 
aD.ND.v'in>  '131  T3">1   HN  man  Jl5  US^llcjjls^j  l.:>-w^j  LlJLc   ^\   jj»  LJLol  ^   *<•  lul 

^4^  i^jiuj  ijl^jJl  jLjcj  nin>i'Dni  D^»mn  JUj    ♦  'iai  nti'ai  nsm  }yo^  JUj 

j^j'-a'abo  *a,LJg1  oJj  ^  dJij'  nin^i'Dni  JlSj  '131   oniN  'V  |n^i  JU  US^ki^'  ^\j^\  ^J 

r.to'nn:  jy,  u^u  ^J,^':i\  ^y  ^j  »jt^  ^u  ooii  slikj  'i3i  nin^^D  ni^N  nriNi  Jy  Ji-. 

in.ip"jnn   ,3   j^       ^  'y^  ,^,  ,-,Dn  jlS.   D^Oniij  DDK  }n^1  Jli  U^^4JLii  aL^b  siU*,.  ^JIJJ 

33  .3  n3'M  ^  ^  ••  '  w^  y^      ^     • 

21    ♦  Ll^U  »JU=y  ^_5-»^l  (^  LloUjj  LJlxil  \jLs^«j  l;..nc  Uj  ^Ij  ,yjo  13  liTiD 

Lu^cV*   c)>*=^   i<Jl>^]   8-»^\y^  j'fiML'X  Ua^j)^   jlUI    (_j».>    UU*   L^   I. 

lai?  ^v  JLs  U  lul  dDij  JyJl  Jts^  «jUU  'i3i  layojj'  xh  plsj  U  ^y  Jls  jji 


'  ny3  )y  Heb.;  but  M  is  obi.  from  the  first  \jis>^  to  t5Jj|.  ^  r>*-^lj  M. 

="  ^S  DHiy  T1N3n''  n3N  '•jy  Heb. 


— ^  M 

♦  l(i...:iU.  Uj  A-«Jj^'  -5^1  y^  ,:;-«  nnyinJl  j^^ijl^  (^  dJi  iJ'^iyi  Jy^    •>  d'-ij 
Uj  n^nirij  hb'Jj  nwinJlj  nuiJl^  pmvi\^  biMi\  ^^  JJaJl  ^^^ix-.  ^j  yt,  ^^ycnn  »Jyj  5 
JlS  ^     ♦  ■,ft..>-;-*-j  (%4^j   *^.Wj^^  J^  ^y-«-«  ^_59  j^  "iJinni  »Jjjj     «  lalli  o-^Ij>- 

J5^  ^_j--2Jl  Jl  M^^^-^.  U'nUNi  Jy  ^;l  UAcvt^-I  ^^jj  J-::^-  li^ninxi  J^j  xo 

;^j--UJl  IdA  J>jy^^  Ur>j^  J-^  '^^  WVj  ])C^  (%4J^  Jpi  J^LiJl  ^j^X3      ♦  D''13J1 

^cW-?.  (J3  (^^^  ^c>A  (J^'^  ^y^y^  L-5jr^  ^j  '»J!c)-«31  Cj,  \^,  ^  ^ 
(J^  ^y  o?.<><v*^|^   oA-o^JLl!   (J^\jjM^^  (J^j   (•-j.^Ui/*^.  ^^/ICuJ* 

lj!ii  q^il  Uj  L^lc  jj^  J  il  bJLc  5^Ui  i^^  dJ  ^_ji^  np'i^n  ••i''  -ji?  Jy       19 
J^  !j)>^  (^^  isJJjj  'iji  2::  riB'na  JU  Ui^  dUi  J.^:^^-^-  y  U  Uj^j  db-^L^  US^-    1=  -a  'ot 

Uj4j.  J.XL!  °i^l:JCJl  (J  ^y.^)  cr»^r^  c/  »^'"^^  J^ir-^.  dJLo^  jJ  j^:>ll 


1  Om.  Heb.  2  -,j3^,  jj^b.  »  t^jJl  M.  *  ^^^  M.  «  UbU^M. 

nsnai'N  m  x  ?  |o  nTia  b  etc. 


\  Jwoi    (J^j  *jL^  _jj4j  (J--<»^  »jl  ' sjjtj    *  'nni  n?sn  JUi  s-oMS  j,-«Jii  'nm  nbann  w  jj;j 

r  j^Li  «  8..JLC  J^jE*^j  ^(La^b  pj^j   ^;-*-o  sJjo 

^c>U3^  o^lUJi  Cy,  U  jUikj  e>i>j  *-^3^^  c^^b)^  ^j^  c^aXao*  i* 

5  IfliJ  JJ-.UJ1  11a  ^i  /ij  D^iunni  n^an  iJaiJ  Jpl  (j^U.11  ^y  ^  »Jl  Jicl 
jji.  JJI  ^--;-~o  ljkt>;=^l  ^y^*  *^^  tj^  j«-««.a.;.)  ii^LJl  sjuft  ^jl  *lcl    ♦  ""nil  n?Qn 

UNDH   J^li®  ^   dljj  blkilj   vjJJ-l'  -J^J^*^   i_S^^^^    (Jj— U!l   ^UJj  "iV   NJN   sJjJ 
lo  ajo,!!^1    [U-^^]*   ^*^   J^    '""^Sn   iJoiJ)      *   vjJJJI    tjj/Aii    ^yj    il^^l    ^yjt-o    ^^   JlLJI 

Jy  ^li  i-ik^"  I4JL5CJ  ksi  ajJlj  «^"  jjj  n^snn  "imo  'JN  iix)i  Jy*  yt^  ^yU-. 
iu-«  j-^.  n^^sDN^  Jy^  i3^n^N  ""V  nnyi  Jl  i^XaJ.!  iibJl  sj  a-^jj  n^jQn  ^p:b 
n^NH  i:''^y  ^nn1  ^^J  n^i^sriNi  j^j^-U^  j_^l  iiiill  &^  jloj  i_y JJb  ^l^!i)\  J-^i 
^  dJji^  J^^^  »^'  Jl^l^  5^-!^  i^j^ji^  J«-j    *  s^iUJIy.!  J\  nyinB'm 

15  '•T'   rje  (C-^  ^J^^  tM  J^  A-eXS-o  &.';.l~>.i  J-»^-  »«*-^.  ^y-*-»  i_^  *-^^  J^.  i:;-*  J^ 

ikfiJJl  saa    :.«.cj  hian  Ubt)>2».\  *U-i.l  ij^  sJX*  dL.jLiu  ^J ^'^    *  !s-»UJj  7n3n 

jy.lj  nonni  rr-nnn  noiK'  ^^U3U  dJj  s^s.  IjAjo^  Jlxcl  ^J-<»  j»i::jl  Ul  c-^Uj  »J' 

20  L,^  iDnJlj  nnnJl  11aj^°  npy^i  pns^i  Dmns  nnn  °LLJb^  sju-^"  U>  bj  sjI  _jji  »-^ 

Jy  ^JJ5C9    ♦  jJl;^\  sil  e>^>  ^^  non  UL;L-i  nxiD  nnny  nnai  ^^d  in  j  ju^ 


^  X^  M.  2  pxta^N  Heb.  '  M  »bUj  corr.  %^\ji ;  Heb.  ny^K"lK>. 

*  DNDPN  Heb.         '^  (Jj--il  M.         "  Om.  M ;  NiTD  yonsn  some  Heb.         ''  J^l  M. 
«  Obi.  in  M.  »  w^saN!?  nioi  Xj  bb!^  ^^^  M.  ^°  j^j  M.  "  ^  M. 

"  V^  M  (ut  videtur). 

M  2 


♦  *ji.4>Aixr  »^x<  ^1^  tXi^  L-^c>^^    '^-^ 

e:>U]^3EJ    cJ^-^    (_^i    ^A^->.   ^^    sJJi    c^lk:L   ^^ir  L^c>3i    0!V^^ 

(sU j  ^j  ~c  j^L-oyj  L-^  J\  ^r^yio.  DnsDn  ""niJ^n  Jy^  ♦  »iCii  w  jo^.  trmn^ 
HN  n^Kii  D^ijn  nnyi  x^  ^_59  Jljj  Dans*  nipax  niK'  D^ynK'  bni?  nN!?D  ^ab  ^j  sJ^ 
^155 '^  °-iV3n3in3  "^rh  r\:m  mc'y  y:i>n*  iJ-«  (^  o^^i*  UjI  »i^  jjl*.  ^;;-o'-^--  D'-i'B'n''  15 


»  .'C3 


'131   C'plb  Jyj      •>  "dJi  ^j"*   ^-  aJI  JUjj   jL^.   ^Jl    Jl'  ^b^l  '131   nN^»  ^s!?  ^D 


1  Obi.  in  M.  2  -^3^  ug^_  s  ^^^_^  sJjj  .  .  .  .  ^^L-j^  ^.>ir"  ^J^  *4^'J 

♦  Li-o  ^J\  o  Jo^  ;_^  Li  Li,  M.  ■*  .  .  .  J  iiJ^j...^    x^3  M.  ?  ^jl^  M. 

"  'ipD  Heb.  ^  Perh.  add.  w   J^-  ^  Ora.  M.  »  Om.  or  obi.  in  M. 

Line  3.  ».*j1,  l.^j^. 


5  ♦  'ijJ:^  ^\  Ji  j^;s5 

^yjo  yiUi  Jlc  ^  '121  -ip3  3"iy  ly  Jyj  ^JiD^a  e*jj^  (^111  w  j^  aiyn  Jy 

iJjj  npnJl  JjjLJj  L_y/^"  aJjj  »Jbjlj  myJl  ^Jl  J^"  iUJ  ajljJJ  ^y  my  ^jj*  lju*_j 
l«.^^^^  myi  -ipn  oc*.*^  L.  ajU  «^iJlSj  ^^^i  ^^y*  niN»  ^hu\  d^d^x  Jy^  «^r^' 
10  Vi  'ni  2ny  'd  Vi  D^q^k  Jij  J  »Jl  (j^"  Nl  L.^  ^^ . ... .  Vj  ijUj  ^_^*  t-ill  ^^^ 
°i^  dui,  ^'  ,^5:^  prnn  Dino  Jy^  ♦  ni?^!?  D^yansi  di>  D^ymN  JU  Ui^npn  'd 
^^1  j_^  n^ai  D"'D"'^  '•a  Jy^    ♦  dD  sU^  L.  Jlc  J.^1  IIa  ^l  u  j,y  sji  j^j 

*  ^-^j-^  5^r-^^   cK^-*-'*'  "^"^  U>^.   LS^  ^"'^ 

l^nn  nas^o  nx  hb^ni  dipni  Jy^     *^^LLJb  J±j  ^^1  Jl  ii-.  ^"^  d^o'«  Jy^ 
j-«jJl  ediil   ^;_^  »^j^   ^  eUi  ^^;5o    J^   LpJ^;'^   ^J^j  ^_5»  »J   (•J^'  L«   ^\  j.*r^ 

vj  .J  °^-  aJl'^^„  J  ^^.;...H  »1»  ^  ^^1  jJH'.  p3D  pNi  Jls  ^    *  D3ina  D^»:J'D  '1J1  atJ'NI 
♦  cLjuJ\^   Jfcl  j^  ^_PJb,lJJ  (^Xa.1  Li-.  [J-^]*  \j jy-^  "^^  jjOj^^LiJLJ  1.^*1? 


d.A.JA> 


>  nnan  jy  pyN  Heb.  2  obi.  in  M.  '  b^ixn  nb  nsns  add.  K  P  x. 

*  Om.  M.  •'  n"'Q  ^JNOn  N^  Heb.  ^  Om.  M.  '  Om.  M.    ^^^jV?)  is  partly  obi. 

«  Om.  B.  ^  e^j^l  aj:.^  M  and  most  Heb.;  nJoi'N  B. 

Line  19.  Xiijss^. 
[II.  3.]  M 


(J  J^5   ♦  {J'^^  J^j  bLi^ii^P^  i^  o-Tjj  Ujl*  s^y  u  li-u  wL^^  Jjj^^   aJmo* 

^  »^^Sjl-,j»  yiLk   Jlc  »i^  J-^iaJI  11a  ^   v--^^  (*^J  '^^^^^   ^"^""^  ''^^'^^  t^^"-'^  roj^-U 
IIaj  DnK>  ■ic}'  i>yi  8^j  b^^:n  N3vn  -»tj>  nyi  prnJl  j  Jls^    *^r-»^^  ^r-^1  J-^^    ~^ 

-^1  d^sj  ^^J  noy^  ij»»  D^ynn  11a  xo  JU  US^^^Jlc  ^^  c^Ul  -icj^ipJl'* 
'wi  i^3B'  ijvi  ylsj  nn^^!fn)  nnsj'yi  ptnJl  j^  JUj  ♦  If  ».•..:  >.>j  «^jpi  J.^1  Jl 
-;Jl11j  ^iJD^  1J1Y^3  n^V)  ^J  ij>y  ■:. : ,. j  ^^^^JCJl  J-^iJl   ^  UjI   »/i  J^  ,_ci*ll  IIaj 

lu*.!^  U  ^L-j  ytJ'sJl  11-0  ^^j  itJ'npD  ji3»j  n^onn  ^  U  »-^  ^;^_5  J  lUl 

j_ji:.   Jl^l   ^UiJ   liJl   »-*i  jjp.lj  "int^''   T   Dab{31^..M.6xJl   ^J  ^])j      ♦  i^-*^'   11a   ^y  I o 
LJ    ;ji-^    Lo    fjlJj    8--^9    <>^AJ    .LaJjfcb    J-ai)l    11a    li^j    jjl    JcxJj       *  J^J  t_>...W.y«»  ^J^ 

^Ijl*j  ^^Uli^^  *l_Lc  ^JLcl  jj-JLaiJl  jJ  nVJ/'D  yilX  .$3  sil  Jji-ii  *  ^^-*^  »-^'^ 
J^l^  11a  ^y  ^'>>^.ll  dlLo  ^^  DnB>3  diL.^^  Jj  UjI  .^.Vl  1)^^  ^ij  JLjU 
*Lj:.1  iii)  tw,Vi  (slLo  jc9  ?v^  Ljjhi  i^liU-w.*  (.juiiir  ^.  J.^  v^JLiir^i  ju^ 

-yjLll  sj  ^lij  us  noy  ah  nvn  ^ai  ^bJL  (jjUj  ^u  ^ ...  g ; «  elL*  sil  Ijkcv^-i  15 

iilj  (Jl  v_-iLaJJ  iilill  sl4i     *  (c*^^  ^J^  &:»rfi >  L«  JL«j  sJ-iij  "^''QVJl  ,jl  v.*JIa3^ 

n»is3  py^y  nirii  (^U3L  nDV"!  in  ntJtj'i'i  Ia<>:^\     ♦  (.Lil^  ^j  Ist/i  *Ui\ 

Loj  sJ^.  c^U*  A-iJ^^  Jj-**^  (*^^  !ul5^N"'JB'  "1C3  ''i'3N  '•oip  n^J  pnoN  pi  e>^U3U 
^jlf  U  A>i-^  l.:.sj-,J  ^;^JL^iJl  ^j^.  1:»>!>.  lili  :  N"'3K>  Id  ""ijaN  ""Dip  I4J  J^  Jj 
L»5  sJXI.  *J  >ji  sJl  J>^3  ^^^j-^J^  's'^  c^*  Lr^  ^  Uijl^lj.  ♦  j^IaJI  dLLo  ^^  20 
nrbyni  L^^  Jj^l  ja  i^nvrh  ptJ'Nn  nyinxi  JUj  nnj  bv  cjiy  n  yaiN  paa  nh  Jls 
8.^L«j  J*^  dim  j,^-^.  °jj  j^*»  ij^i)  mm  pp  J  ^  pmJl  i1a  j  U^  ^j^j  '121 
^^j.^t;  ^1  Jl£  (sUi  Jjj  D^ytJ'sn  Dnna  JLsi    ♦  1<^^  ajo,^1"  &.^.«)j  J_j^1  eUil 


^   ^^^l5  M.  2  y-ju  M ;  niDQJ  Heb.  ='   8,^1-^j  M ;  nnSTiDI  Heb. 

*  t^Dl  or  ^^Ul  M.  5  See  Index.  «  ^^jjUJ  M.  ^  idjJl  M  (bis). 

«  ^^[11]  M.  »  Only  one  of  these  words  in  M.  ^°   x^Jf,  M. 

Line  i.  &jJlj.  14.  L»y-i,.  22.  L=^. 


^       j^  ^^  WjjJ^*  euL^  ^J-<.  mjj.  ^4JLo  j^lj  JS  JJ..1  sx*j>  lylS  l^!!)  ajo,!^  j^j 

5  ♦  Jpl  diiXl  »p  p^IsCj  ^j  j,^jl*  j^y  ^jj5S  ,j«^j  ^jj^^  man  nS  Jyj    *  i-oljy. 

eUL.  ijlii  naan  n^a  ^jt  nnxJl  sIa  nx^  dhd  nnxn  to^  »Jy  c;^  ^^^^^  _j^^ 

^j\^  3ajn  dJu  ^;l  Juc  dJi  Jj^j  m^yvo  prnJI  j  JlSj    ♦  i«j^^l  «^^  ^yJi-3  ii^_>£ 
10  ijl  ^  3j3n  b^  •^n"'  i^nani  JUj    ♦  j»a^  j»Ii)  (jjJl  i-v»!iL)  iju^!^!  ^^^-^^  '^■^^  (^ 

ul 

JjOba     ^^^^.^     4>A*^.     C^W^)^     5^^^*-?     U*^J     2C>lf     l^^^^^*^     ''•' 

*  (j>A.Ai0.c>J  o^siAi*  'Uyj^i  cs-uijb* 

20  jJjjJl  i>>Ls:^'  ^  D^Divy  Uli    «  '131  n^nirni  x^j  '121  nxnx  ^ani  prnJl  ^3  JL5 

n»:N  ni'ti'ni  prnJl  ^  JUj    *  y-b  ^JUJl  dLUj  jJ  il  D^dip  oy  ^531  D^Divy  b 
Jlpj  5^  j^  JJl  iil^y  Jlc  ^^  ul  jA  niN^sjJl  »ljkj  n^nty^  nis^sJi  »^j  nnx 


'  rnxno  Heb.  2  y3-,jj  t,;g  coj^,  '  ^^1  M.  *  D^JNyi^X  Heb. 

«    ju^^ill  M.  «  Perh,  ^1  (Ileb.  omit  this  sentence).  ^  Nnil^T  N^B^NI  -IN33N 

Ileb.  ^  Arab,  of  ver.  25  om.  Heb,  ^  JJuiJ  M  in  text;   ijJajo  in  raarg. 


^^  j,l3j  jAa-lj  AJ--.  sj^j  lion*  (jSjlijU  *4JU  (iiULft  ^^^  Jij  ^SL*^  jjl  (j:.La  J[  ^ '  ti^-^ 
ij^l  Jli  dJJJj  ilftJl  j»Ujj  T^S^  ^JN  JjJ  ^^  'W1  in^C'Di'  ''V  "i»N  HD  J.^  j_5J  dJj   N  .no  'rro' 

♦  natJ'K  ntj^in:  ninh  Jy  _ja  lju*j  'iji  nvn  6 
jA  5-wsc  e>A.>  lJc>31  ^;>vj>^^  (^*^^j  u^W.  '^^  L^<>s\3!  ^4*31  •  n 

ID     Nl     Jlj       ♦   J^/*J»-     «;-!^     J)     IITnJI     &;»w4)     U     (Jiff    Lijl    J_^    ^,1     ^_5>L*JL> 

pNi  W1J  pNi  dy^     ♦  aj^ajlCi  ^^  j^y  (^jJ1«^jjl5C:))1  ul  J-j  'iji  nyDn  lo 
jl^  jjj     ♦  Jjb  Jf\  j_^y  ^jl   Jl  Ajpjj:^!   ^  ^jh.  JJL*«  x».l  8J,Lsr5  J  w\  jA 
JUi  nifivJl  dbti  U  ^  ^  lj:>V;j  ^jjl^^I  jAj  Jpl  eUil  sj|  vj''y  pn  mm  pp 
*  L?-iL»j  4_^li  J^^..  Ujfcj  ^^^j^x-oJl  ^^U.  sil  yt^  vjnp  Ticj'  riN  lajj^'ii  'ui  T""! 
e;^j  (.4^  i^;^  ^J^  J-^j®  (*4J^J-U  ^:^»  '«jJ4  IjJb  ^  U  _jj»,  nV"iN  inD''!?K'"'l  J^j 

j».^    ^j   ,^Xo   L-ii?.   ojyolx)!   'l^XJ^'  o^  ^,^Xo  j.!L.\  (Vj"  •''" 


^  ^^j^U  M.         2  om.  M.         «  ^K>  Heb.  "  Om.  M.           ^  .^^^^M;  |N3  Heb. 

«  Jl  M.           -^  Ulj  M.            8  ^j3  Heb.  '  J-Jj  M;  i5^p1  Heb.            ^o  c^Ls^.  J 

j»4JLo  Jc».l  M;    THN  Dnjy  inNm  D^  Heb.  "  Arab,  of  ver.  23  om.  in  Heb.; 

partly  supplied  inf.  p.  av,  6,  by  worse  MSS.:  DNnSl  nJli^N  '•Ip  ^i5D  Slp''  Dn3^£5  I^K  '•31 

Line  4.  t.iJLj.  12.  Lo^. 


n 


•   (^jy^  (_^   o*->jj*  c:>/4>>^  *^^^  tv^  t-^l?^  ^-^  '^'^  '" 

2^  (J  JWil->  u'  i>  eJJ^  Jj^  cr^*^*  (^^>^  (J^  ^N^"':"j  "i^^^/J  U^j  ^^1 
»^^  ^^  e^  ^NnaJ  ^,15^  j.r.ifc  (Ji*l  csJJij  ii-Al  ^^ ^  ^^5^1  a5C^:U1  ^^ 
10  s^b  s^  j«_—  U.  Jj  lu-^  j^  iJNnna  c^j^uj  J  »j1  <— ^j  ♦  »-J'  u^^j  ^-^^ 
^Jl  Ju:  jjo  Ixftj  ♦  eUi  »jj!cj  JLob  Jl  'U.  csUS  Ajc^  tsUi  JLoU  c-aj^jjc^ 
^^  Lj.^   Jfl^l   »jy»  ^x-,— '^  t^JJ^  <s)Llil   u^    c^^J  ^^  L^   I4I5  o^j  i5o!lU\ 

(_s^  pTnn  YP  rwh  ""a  ms  p  pn  Jy^    ♦  »4*j  Jx  o.. ... : ^  ^j  j^  (^A'tiifc  cr* 

JUi  jirnJl  ^y  »T^  U  A^l^^^Sjj  ii».l  ^ 

M    LioU'     .^JU     j^A*    {2,^jjd\     oA^^bo     cy^Jai     L-^jJi     ^jiX^^l    r . 

21  *  °o^^ 

^  npli'K  X;  npl^N  cett.  2  nyDD  codd.  ^  DJri'N  X.  *  Om.  M. 

6  jjj^lij  t5^jLo  M,  but  not  consistently.         ^  c5*^  *^°'^^'         ^  <-^  ^ '  ^''^  ^^^* 
Line  7-  »Jj-  9-  W^-  I4'  bu-*JL«. 


*   kij    yiyn    J^    ^^  _^^1    LT^    w^ir'-    LS^    cJL»j:    ^j^l    ^Jl  JxiJ    Jj    l^-Jitlj 

^JL^  i^J!  j^  t_;^^l  j^  ^^l^  ^/^  u^yi  ijlS^silS^Tonn  Diin  liODi  JU  J  s 
jj  ^1*  .^  ,>^.  ^l^  c^l^j    *  v>j  ut^:>ii  Jl  J^\  ^'  is'^\  ^\  ub  ^ 

V^S>  ^^\  ^_5^J  *  cj/ftJI  »«-Jl  ^3^^  jjO  (^jJl  j«-^l  ^  OuJl-J  ^j^l  l^^jjJ 
UjO   (jl,j     ♦  e*jtaj;lj   («-»p^i   ,;>*  ei>^l»  jj   ^^l   ^Jl   prnJl   ^y  {j\^  iu\  \JL».-*.  ^^ 

c^  LT^-  r'-'  '^^^^"  ^'-^  r*^-5  ^-^"^^  J^  c^^ii  J^b  ^,^J!5C^  °^y  j\^  c*iij 

^^1    J^    U-4J^1    C^*"^    wlls:*-    ;J-S^lj''   ^j-JCLo    (^1;  j^^l    i'jJt,    ij\j  Uli        ♦   U,Jl5o   lO 

JLob  ^Jl  elUl  jjx  juLS^v^JN  "lON^i  JJb  jjj  ->pn  nny  ny  ^Jjn  -idn^i  jj^xj  Jy 
^aJLii  ^j\  jji  ^jJ  »jl5J  *Ldl  ^yJ^  ^JLc  *— Sjjpl  i];l  US  eUi  ^Jlc  uJ-aj  ^jl  Jop 
j^y  1  JLs «  J.4JL-J  ^\  ijj:^;^^.  jJ  i5oni  » jukj  in  bv  naip  djiTjjo^i  aUj  J\ 

I,  J\  j^  ^"^  pmJl   ^x^,^   ^^  J^.  |Jj  «JL£  J_i  ^^l   JLib   ^l::^.  UU:  ^^  15 

^1  ^jjxi  nanon  ^:'\'obsh  Jl^j  n^cnn  pTnn  ^no  ny  JoLJl  ^^  mp  nns  viok^ni 
^,-ji5  *^^  ^^.  J  US  iSoHl  j^  jjb  ^^  JJUJl  ^1  jysi  Jj  v^-^sA^  jjh  '•iioi'Q 
»jui  Jjtij  t?jJI  11a  j,jj^.  jl^  J\  jo^  prnn  ^no  ny  JoUJI  JUj    ♦  a5oM1  ^^ 
v|>^  W^  N3:fi  eJbJlj  t^np  ^yUIj  nn  Uju^I  'Ui!  sjJJ  ^^^^j  jj^UJl  ^y  g^^i  20 

♦  j^.  U  ^  dJj  ^^  ^^j  ipa  ny  iy 

♦   (J^  jlivO   (JjU   ^__^i4>i:w 


»  }N1  codd.         2  Ins.  ••i^  (^^^jTi)  B.        '  |Na  codd.         <  n^N  codd.      ^  «  'nnnn 
codd.  ^  Dip  ijK  X  J  aip^JN  cett.  ''  |NSpN1  X.  «  Perh.  jLj  and^:^l. 

®  ND  codd. 

Line  22.  U-fJ. 


liJo.^    jc^.    SJjjl     ^w^,    Ca.^    jJj    CUiiJ    JJJ    v:yljlj.<JJ    Jj     (jl    t^lj    Jut)»    A»*^^    j»UiC 
5  [<^1)]    *-^^  ^J^^    c^*  J^"^    rb    *^r*^-    ^J^^    ^^^     i;;-*    ^-^'^  ^;4^'    ^J^    J^'    «J^ 

cr*  l»4i^i  o^^l  ^  ^yb  J^lj  lP^'!^'^  cr*  c^  (^  "^^  ^-^  J^J  *1j^^  t/^^^ 
^.  sJjk.)  Ic^^  ^/4^'   sUlji  sJIa-o   ij,*   dja^   (Jj  ».^U  *  ^jl*XJl  (^1^  L»Jj  (jiLf^l 

^j^     J.     if-A-Ajl     SJyAi     »-<^J/»     ^'^J     IWjuflJ    »-Jl     *Lsj.     ,^^p-*>Jl     U_i5j     LJls     SJJlJ     ^j^^ 

Jj  I4JJ0   ^J^^   xj>^\  »J  J-*-<»  vi^^^-Jjl  <^;1>  X*:>   J^  iS]^   *^     ♦  ^Ji-^^l  ^;^  ja  ^ZS 

*     *    *    ^    i^j*.     jJ    ».Xa.lj    J5     ,j\    (jl^    Jj     (.£^i)L>     iJ^l^r    AB.rflvU    ijOj^l     sjub     ^j^Xj 

ao  ninil  y!3"lN?  sJjJLS  i^-^  ^^1^  ^y  <.5;^^lj  •— *J^'  u-];  (4^  o-s^-**-^  i^  iJLa-ljj  jL--Jl 
^^    ^1    ^^jftj    ixJ,^!    ^^    sJolj    k-.j    ^^   sJ^lj    i^    cy^    u^    t^];    (J       ♦   CD^H 

»jua.yi  ^\  ^ij*  nn^yvD  J^j    ♦  pp  NV^  Dn»  nnsn  p^  J^  jjkj  j^^-^l  »xiJ 

oJljl^  i^\  ^^j^l  8Juk  ^JS^  {j\j^  i-*Ap\  ji-o\   ooo  LftJL*   t:yju3t-o  ^^!  ijtJ,^!  ^^ 


»  IN3  codd.  2  tjQy,^  X.  3  |5^3  gQ^j.         *  Perh.  9-}i^-         ^  |N3  codd. 

"  ni'SJQ^  B  D.  '  \n  nnNlijN  codd,  »  Perhaps  supply  ci>U.U  (^>  44*  ^_^ 

^L->J1  {L^  ^  iijo.ljj   ^;^^i^l  A^j*.  ^  iiJo.lj  ^l^  ®  }N3  codd.  1"  NnjN3 

codd. ;  and  so  passim. 

L  2 


jm1S»  (jivA^!  ^d^^5  *^^  ^'■^^'^  tji-^sOi  oU^u  bo  c>j  8^^^^*  V        A  j.4xi 
e:>t>jL*«sj  ^/iV^-'^  <://*^^  c:>^,.Ai«Xi!  s-^lxc  t>-^^  iji^  *]ax  \filil  j^«  a 

IasVO      ^«JU      j»-^)cvl      Jj^*l      5-^4      j^-LiC      (jikAsOl      C>w-aJ^      C5^S     '  '  ^° 

O^^^     ^1    C_As:J!    C5*^     fV^"?    (•«^^t>M    ^    (♦Ixu'i    ^ji*A^«    ir 
^^y4^j^   L>*o.c>.ii3!   <>i2^U!   <Jli>   jJXjU  (.>o.c)i  c^^^^L  c>JU.w«  ir 

JcVA?.   ^*J>.    2W».l^    Ca-^^    tXS*"^^     Pr^'^^    *U*vS>    Jl     J     cJ^*^    I** 
L?/^^    (jU  "^   L^l;    ^   ^j^    ii.X3.lj    ^j^3   sJ   vl*Jtil»   ijlj  ^^4^^!    k^   JJLC   i»_ft5lj    j,-Jic  ^Ji-J$^ 


^  |Nn  codd.  '  JN3  codd. 

Line  7.  ^Lii.  14.  Ixa-lj  etc.  21.  Li^etc. 


1  ji^li  jLc  Jjo  Jpl  JyJ\  u^u^j  »i^  t/JJl  pU.1  Jl^r-^  n^nnn  "^n  nxian  nnx 
— ^^ —    (2]Jj  joo  ^^  J  »jl  <Jl«>  Jj-J  '•^n  nxnin  nns  JU>  UjI*  csUi  jjo  \1»  ^j\ 

*  eUUAl  8Xft  ^^JJ«-.  ^J  }1Tn  "IN  Dl^n 

«  ^Xiiil  o^.  ^  »ilS"job  ^^j  Jl5j^-  ^V,  US"jy^  ^_5U  ^iil^  Jl^  prnJl 
1 1  Uij  ms  nnj  Jju  ^hs  ^^1  *-.\  ^ij^  u^  ^l  cr^^y  »-sJ  ^^i^*  ^^^^  ,J^^  ^^^ 

sJ.  ^^i  r*\i>s  (JljU  <>^U  (ji«-i^  1  j|^  cy^Iai^  (.y^  o*^^  r 
(_^AuJ  eybl^AsJl  (JT*  ^y^  ^/^  »^!-t>^  ^^^  lA^^  c:^^  i« 

*  ^^*    JoUo^    cJ^*Jt>.   ^;;\J^    Vc)-?.   t>^    i^_;<c:)s=SV^   U>*yS^   2L<W    L/^*-?. 

^^^A^^,Jivo  1^3  ^j3  s^  ^^\j  oe^;s)\->  (^^t>  l>*»a3^  Oe^b)^  J^^t^i^ 

20  *    S-^-^^V^ 

j4^}\  Jji  (-m|^  v^/lTcic^Jl  eHV>/*^^  o>^^  ij^\  i^^  i^^y  "" 


^  DNJD^N  codd.  '^  Om.  X.  =>  ni3  N3N1  ins.  B. 

Line  ll.  ^j!>l^.  l6.  lae^lj.  19.  U^b. 

[n.3.]  L 


vi*j«--Jl  jj,  D^iy^  iDB*  NT  J^i,  'iJi  I'p  pN  di^tJ'h  mt^nn  nnno^   -^1  il.j  ^^    ■"  -t^  'j^^)' 
^nni51  Jji/pjv^y  ^^W  ^  UJl  ^lii  J-il^l  JU:  J^  pjv^y  ^^^o  ^^l  j^j  lo 

U  ^_^  ^^,5CiJ\  ^yli»l  dJi  j^j^jti  ^J  J^5  ^^^T  Ijji  ^_5i.«j>  ND1D  na  nj?  JjS 

«J    ijjs>.    U    Ijufri       ♦  ^/---aJ\    .-.^    Jj    Noi^n    plSn    Jji5    O^yJ    *U\.l    v-/^ 

*  B'vK'  njtj'a  Jliii  i-fuii  ii*-  ^j  (j/^  ^ y^..  ^^  ♦j^I-^^-UJ  c5J^1  aj^  i^ 
(JU.i!c>  1^1  ^__^  W.U^  W^  i^lUl  __^,-*oUiX>  »^1U   t^i>3i  zUw  ^_^>  I  A 

(_jl.    lij\     »^     J-*J     (jujLill     i-ili     lju4     t— *-^     jLvJL^^I     iil)     aIjlII     i—-^     8-il     (5^1-*-5*l  ^O 

Jl£  Jx>  IIaj  dtUl  ^  ^^  Jj  n^an  \m^  ^y  »;laj  IIaj  JjIj  ^j  yt^  X:^  «sUj 


PerhjU. 


Line  lo.  "^yjn.  \%.jiij). 


ro 


(j^li  J^  ^^  ^Uj;1  uA»-*^  u^  r*"!/^  i^^-  ^;-5^  (u^)  }^ji  *-^  *5^^.   (*4^-Wi 

n.j'ncN    c_^l   ^^^1  U   Jl  w/^r*-^  ^''^'^V  Di^N  H^DH  ^m  HNI  jjUU  Jy  J^  e:;bLoJl 

5  xo  ^_^1  ^^  ;^. Jl  ^^  I4--JU.  Uj  cms  ••»*  ^\  y^-i-?.  v;i>^  j^  (j^UJ  -t?-?**^  J 

p3.Tn>1  Jyj      ♦  p  sJJi  ^:;jjq  y^^l  JooaJI    ^y  (sJJi   -^ .?. : ...  Ui'm^  DV   ^  ^i)^ 

py  J^JQI  pjnyi  py  J  j;^„  ^^l  Jl  w  ^y  »j1  J.vtr?  py  j^jqi  pjiyi  py  ny  nm 

pjnyi  py  iX.  mi  pj»T  n^Jij'n^  nao^i  ^^jX^l  U/i  ^Si3  ^\  nnvJl  »!»  »jl«  J-oj^--j 
,^j  D^m  IoaJ  jjt^  pjiyi  JU  J  j^lj  oJij  jjfcj  py  JU  si!  JLclj  «  py  j^qi 
Jjo  ^  jjjJl  ^vn  Jix  jA  py  a^ai  Jls  dDJ^S^  dJi  ^y  Uj  iii>  ^y  cr^J  J^  J*^- 

'  .TO  'riD'    S)nK>  VXn   iJjJ   JJU   »^j   ]1])  i^   Jj-flii   ,_5^1  y^yt   Jj  ^^J;^^   (J^   u-a-oj   ^Jl* 

^  .T        '•ifni  cnyio  nyi»^  ••3  ajo  U  ^y  Jy  dJ j5^  ntj>yN  nnyini?  nrr'i  JjiJ  b'k  id3 
16  i-r^.  \^jS'sJ^  M  *LJlxJ1  A^yjjj  dLjk  eUi  ry-^  c^*'J  i/^  ^  dDi ^j*  IX^i 

2o&il  ^-j/«^  in^na  piaoi  Tn^  wn  Jy  J\  u^L^l  »j1  »^  s^/b  a^n^  Njn  «Jy 
jLc  ^^11   Jlsi  Jj   aJl  talUu  ^  (2)Jl.  j^^i  ^yLo  ij-^  panyi  py  lA^  jjlc 
^jjij-  c5JJl  diiil  iiy  Ji  ^rs-^.  njDi'B'i  Jyj     «  Jyill  eUlj  j,jjij'  uT^^ixi 
^jl  Ul  pnyn^  Jyj    ♦  JyJl  ^UJj  nb^  pai^i'y  '<^^pb)  Jy  ^^  J^J^-^-  »-^^ 


^  Ins,  Q  only,  ^  See  Index. 


c:>ljj!^    e>-»j    ^J\    TfO-^^    ^;;*^AiO»   (jOjuJU   '»-vojj^i  ^avnaxJ    (J^^^ 
^_^J^»/-i^  ^  pa^D  ^nt^>y  ^j^^  s^jl^JI  ^j^     ♦  ^LJl^L,  Jlc  ijJaLJl  ^j  \y\j 

l^U   j,45J^  k^j   j^   j^jo   ^j^  x^rJI   ^^   Jjt^  sol  ^— »Jl!cj   ^^^.^>JLx«  Jjq   j»jjb  jjjj^  lo 

IJxjkj   Dn^Q  a^OK'l  intJ>  JU   s^j  °dJi  ^  Jl   a^Ul  Uj   ,_^«  j._^  ^^(j..^^  ^j    :d  .» "jnn 

JLsi  pnb  nb^i  ptj'np  oy  anp  xnaj;  ^jl^  ^,  ^     ♦  pirn  ^^j^dd  dqi  ^  ^5 
c^'••^'^^  u,-»  c^'J  "^^^  J^ls*  (^'^J  c^-^'J  (*^j^  l^UJ  jji^^  ^b^  pjv^y  ^K>^nph 

ij,j^   toj   ^  U-i   1 4  ».-»--L.b  IcLiJ    *]^   ^JLc  *J^.  ^j   »-;^H>-i    (J^    ^yU-a    ^j    Jl^CL 


^  ^bn  PQXj  t3pD>  cett.  2  -)3^  p.  i^-,2^  ggtt^  3  peph_  ^^_  4  jy 

nJ^D^  P;  HT  ^^y  most.  ^  N»  codd.         «  Ins.  PQ;  om.  cett.         ''  PQX:  UlJL«l 

*  »jh   A.     As  above  B  K.  ^  Peril.  ^^JS. 

Line  i.  Lo^u,.  5.  gLiu*. 


f  a    I  •kdMlLS 


CtT" 


j^JXx^  j»i*  1^3  oAAAC^  c^y**  cy«^<>^^  u;^  »^  l^/^lcvi  ev<  e>AJ»j^ 

l^jLLyj).  L^-Jic.   iiU^  ^r*— ^   e^   ubtV^.)    *L^I   ajo,!    ^jX-    JLj    nil   v_jj!c 
*Lj1,1  dlLJL)  JLoU  aJL! — »  ^^j  (j?^::— <>   ^-J^j  U--4^  (—"J   (J  U-^  »J-*_j  (^4-4*^^ 

eJU3U  "iw  n  1.-13  (^^[5  'iD"'3  'T  ^v  J^^i"  n^n  i^'j  jk-y  i*Jj^l  ^^ 
15  »ju*  ^^  jL  Uii    «  UU*^  JL£  c^j  jj»«  »iii  Nnvn  nNt5'i  ^]PU  ^P  !»  rnxa 

JUi  L4JLC  l^^■i  JjLJil 

j^4.i^.  j^U  L/y^¥*^.  «^v^  ''6jMj>&  »Xim  t^JJS  o^-o  ^^y^  'ijJi\si\^  v^ 


^  }3nO  codd.  2  xnriNpQ-l  codd.  ^  pno^N  codd.  *  pD^ll'^t'  ^■ 

p''DN1B  P ;  CplDB  cett.  ^  np  ins.  P ;  om.  cett. 

Line  4.  IJiU.  1 1.  liy«  etc. 


(^jJl  »^  n:i:  Nin  J^jjj    ♦  ^lUl  y.^,.^  ^  dilo  ,];^-^l  Jls  ^lil  ^,^\    — ^^— 
*  njnj  ^N  innn  atj'^i  Jjl»  njij  ^J^  <__fl.*.JJ  j^^jJI  ^Lju  ^  is  .n3  .« n"T 

*^   c^ALI   ensA^    cjy>j^   's^^^    o^   cy^^    (^\    ey>-^c>i>  n      5 

Jyj  Nnanan  NDvn  p^N  ^y  J\  ^.,^„  ••i'  -idni  Jy  i^l  _jjij  ^1  Jy^  yh  p^oi 
♦  JjjLll  j,Ujj  i^yi'^h  n^nv  pis  Jy  J'^^^-^.  ^'^^  "^^bi  ^° 

♦  n^o:j'  ^nn  yi-iN  ^^.  ^Jj  o^^^l  ^^  ^^  dJU-  ^^1  «i>l3l^-^  ^^^1  ^j 

pijap"""!  sJjJj      ♦  JjjJl   »1a  o^U  dJi  JJ^Jti  sDl   JJLC    ^   t:yl5p.   (_5a,   -Jo,!^!   sjus,. 

^.::^Asu)u•  o>J^^  Cj^ls\i  ufc^ib*  c)-?.<>i5*-  l^ilXoui  (Juoi  j^\i  (K^J^  evo 


^  Perh.  Laj\  li^-^j. 


Line  5.  U^^.  19.    jx^..  22.  iUi. 


^^  JjjJI    bUj    v-iiij    (_^«-J    ^jU    ^\j^    dJjj    jjk    pVj    ixjj^l    iJjjJP    *LjJu\     ^1 

♦  3  ^  > .»  U  aJj^  j>4^  '^'-^  ^^  ^  ft ...  >jU^j 

UaJo.1  (jjU*i  ^_;io.JJL>  L4JLI.  ^1  nva^O  V3">nJ1  .-ills:'.  ^jL-JIj  ^^I  J1« 

10  S-*J1    *Ju*>    sJl    *— ^j-^    1*^    *-^^^    H^J    ""^^    n-iXs    sil    *— Jj^j    (^l-jJl    *jLsrir    (_>«Jl»    (^jJi 

*  (JiXb  ^j5   sSX/Oa  c)<y>.  '^  j^(^^  ^^Ualw  jCsUaiw  ^4JtA,k>  jJ 

kjlAj  ^  (^j '  Jlxcb   v.t.W>  j^  |l3i?B>Jl  L.U  1D^»1  -Ip"'^  }D^B>  kUJl  aj!^  «J  ^j 
I5j4i  la^Jai  Uj  3L>...i.;.H   blj^y  niDD   in   jS^jjJ   J   ^ysr^   c4^  >4J  T^l  ^'j 

o     ♦  s-»jU>j  s-»^L)  culjtvJ^i.  (._.aj;5J1  t»>^«  rl/^  J^l_)  laUil  (c-^j  |JLc  iu*»^1». 

20  ♦   ^e^  4.>A»^c)>J>. 

poi'n  IK'DO  jAj   tallj   jLc   u^j  U   JUJb   u^o    j^\    ^..^*.^  IJukj   j»UIl    Jjjb"  Jlc 


1  n^T  codd.  2  n^J^N  add.  C,  om.  cett.  •'  py\  C.  *  Prob.  blj^b, 

"  tJYl  codd. 

Line  5.  Lkb.  6.  tijla..  7-  (j/^f<y^' 

K  2 


U  JU:   *^"i!l  iSis:^  ytj  IHTia  pnSDI  2^1"'  r\:'<1  JUi  ^jUUJl  sjji  uJo  ^^.  i_ft5jj    '  •  i3>-''^ 

J*l  ^^  dij  in^ns  pisDi  Jy^    ♦  n  von  niv  idm^jn  rr-K  ioni  J^ii^uj  l^/S"   "^^"^^^ 

^jl    dJij    '•nDJ?    D1D3    Nin    N^n    JjaS^^-^Jlc   iliji-sr"    ^Uilj   iJb^    v^^    (»4J    u^  '"'' ciD 

jjui  JlXii  sLuJO   ^)!  ^  ^j  Ajo   »-J1   «-b-srJ  Lo  ijjjj XJ  ^;1  ^_;-l-Jl   eubU  C?)^  ^y  5 

J-^  ^  Jl5  a^^j  ^JD^  nnina  mn  ^^"^1  JUil   ^  ».ly>  Jli-j  JUJl  ^U^  i.nD^'stc 

JU  jjj     ♦  D^>n  naoro  in»^  JUj  i»{y  ^n^n^i  ^v  ^xn^ij  |i-i3T  isd  snan  ^^LJl  ^ca.T^o'bnn 

D^mmni  D^ijn  b  nx  ^nvnpi  JjaS'  JJaJl  J^j;-~-j  *4i«i  Ji*  *-»^  iJJl  i-iLa^*  j^  ^  •"'  ''*"' 
J^.  u'  (^>^  nv3^»  yniN  c]^  ^^.Jjo  i^U^^  (r>^.^?^  u^  cr-^j  t3snn>  p»y^ 

♦  ^(jxlc  A-)«M»s*    ^^JLaiil    jjlj   dJoJLj^j   A-JLia^«   d-efcX-a.    *4-Ju:    ^^XJu    *La_iL>l  lo 

e>^  Jo\»i  2u3Xxl!   (j>*Jl  cyyws   (J^^   c>^   c>^^-^<v^-   c>^   >i='^   '' 

♦^U3^  TJt>Ai»4J  e>^'^5  l^^^xu:^  »^C1aU  e:>AxJi  ^^^Xr^ 

iJl^wJJ   « jjb  C»)iLa   t_^^.^Mi  ^JU   ul    uj^  djqUl   iji\yAi.    ^    (j>^  ^  _^'J^.    ?^j 

Jyj  ♦  ^^Ls^  (>_aJjj  *45yu  J.:lS  »j  J0;J  D^'^Dp  sJ^jJii  Nti'N  mp''!'  n^NTI  Jli 
^•oyn  ^j  i*^.  (%4J  Ls*^  ^  .  1^  — ..  ..U  >.  ^^JjLj^  (j^^-^.  »-*^  ^-^;^^^  HOtJ^J  llllll 
DJiTiJ   ^^  ij^^\   iJLk-«  nnNTI  sJjjj      ♦  LJjJl    ^^  It^y  ^    AiJa3   LojI   s^j  iLj 

♦  AJjJjjJl  ^y  (J^   (•^^l  ^J^.  •ij/i'^  L^JJ^ 

exAiaxl    °^__^iu3L>     jd^^*^     (^Uaiw     (JO'Jjl^    0»b!»>\.s:Jl    ^^"^     "'         ^° 


N^N^)  P  only;  X^N  cett.  '  ^J^T  C  '  Npa^xn  N^JHOI  C 

Line  4.  b»Ji.  5.  LJjJo.  ii.j^lj.  15.  Ljkj. 


dJls  N^jnpa  nnn  ^ariB'D  Jy^     ♦  p»ip^  pa^D  7r\m  ily  ^j  dJj  ^.t......  US 

(j^    »— j^    *J       *   p i « *  >    £;a*'«i.ii    cJ/«J'    »^HJ    uj^    iat-j--    ^^^-jiJj    (jjyS   ilU   L^^ljJ 

♦  i'i'D^  N^ijy  nxi'  pi^oi  ^y  dJi  ^^sSjlwj  j.*  U  ^^_ 

iU)uU3    oa»X:^    ^ifl^!    (^-^3    (^^\yS3\    \y«,   ^^yii^i-    e>^^^  1 
^U)!^]^  jOyjop' ^J^ii;!  ^4j<a31  (J^  5.j^\j  jSu!i^  l^a^^I  ?f^^  (J^ 

20  j»-ft-«L-jj.l  ij^JuJl  ixJ^I  ^^il  J  *u..i  Xj  i^j^^  y^.  uIj  }^  c^  LStV^^  *^  r/^  *^' 


^  iriDI  codd.  '^  \T  codd.  '  Dian^  corr.  P  in  marg.  j  D"ina'»  cett. 

*  cnnan  or  man  codd. 

Line  10.  ^jL^-jjiJ,  ^I»^,  L»i,  JLaj.         12.  LUIj.         21.L4J. 
[11.3.]  K 


\ 


y  .T  DT 


OkAijl  JkS  lilj  e*jj^   ^_jiA-   aJLH^Jl   i.ya}\  nx^,   «l;l  cuJa  L«  ^J  15*-*^   ^"^'"^   ^^'^  J^^  5 
P   n?"'031    c^)^J    *^jl/*i^    5/"-"    A^aAJl    jjl  jj»    »-bjlj.     .^la.)  ^JtiJ    J    ^la.    t  fl"-^^' 

i-JUJl   iil^-Jl    u_Loj    pj      ♦  kai  _^\jL:Lsr^.    ^^    ^>^jj    (^'    J^   ij*   Jj.    JJ^    -c^j 

^y  jj\  J-j  nn  ni2B'i'i  Jy^    ♦  JU^^  a|^'  ^.y  ^^^  l^i^i.  dUij  ^jJI  »-j-iJ  L^l 

jji^  ^yJ\^^    x^  l^iati   ^^   »;33  L*  jjij    i*A.b   vJuJ^l   eyJos-o   U5^  l^jl   L*-*!    »aU» 

cJb*  ipCL  j^l  jjfc  nDia3  ]'<vbv  rhr\)  Jy^    *  ^jUU  il5  xo  i^j^^^jl*!  eUji^  15 

D13Nij  3n3>  31t3  n^On  b  DN  ^jL.U  Jy  jj*  N^ao  ntJ'3  >ij13N  ^Dlp  nij  pIDN  pi  jjyj    to  . 

^^   anB'a    djJu    ^^  _^^    Jj    t^UJl    djl*   jJlkaJ   L.    »-a-<»jj      ♦   *4j1Jlc1   JLp 
^^^!j  _^,.*JJ   l^il^   iJLlll   iil^-Ji  ^i    J      *  JjiJl    u.    ^liJ   us"  »Jca.j  ^\jjj>j^  20 

i-Jlj^l  s)y«  JjLej  [Ji-^.  t^UJl  dyL.  JL»y*^l  J^aiJi  ^j  (sUlS^  vjJl  ^^^^;jl*1 

»liy  n  y3nK  pa3  nh  Jy,    ♦  iobj-Jl  d^.  jT^  _^\  ^j\  jklj  onny  by  '^p^ 

^^4^1  jA  rh  3n>  id!?b>i  Jyj    ♦  d^dk^h  nirm  y3nKb  pnni  inDijD  ■utiri  noyai 


3  nD« 


'  n  codd. 


5  (^y>  W^  oaASU  (^oS\  V^VxxJi  e>^?  W*^  c5*  (^^^^  jUii^  c>^l 

♦  I4J  Jax^  (^Ua\.;oo«  jbly>asdJ  ^-^J-'   '^i'l?  W^^  C5^ 

10  e>-*-sx*w^    «cAj)  ^^->^  ^    t)->c)«^'    (i/U-^U    »X»<oli    jUU<9«    jL>»aA4 

cy«AAA£  (JX^   e>^V>c   ^j]^  l^lji  ev^  LxUbl    s^JLixll   t^yi3!  cy^ 

J^L^J^ib    jl.j^   8^   ul^fr^'^-    (sJ^^^    oJil»    ^y^*-.    (Jil    ^;^^   u^   t-^ 
^\5^Uii  Lj^il  W  u^  ^■^^*-«»  cr*  J"*^'  «''^^  i*^^^  J^  ""^  J>*^  •^•y^  *^4><J^ 

^  -  •  \   gJUj    JI.---J   i^jJ.:-k:^.    J£«j      ♦  D"'D1DJb   l^il*  U^^  «-^U.   Lfri-o  »jLa.lj   J> 
20  uy^^   LT^^    (riaj:!    ^;;f-^'    ftUlSj    t,;-,:Lftil  ^LkJl    Jaxl  _^_j  °j^3    ^^^-^  ""^^ 


(..^ubJ 


^  bn»^  codd.         2  Perl,,  gjj^^         3  Perh.^,-«jJb  only. 
Lines  I,  7.  Lleb.  13.^^,41*.  i\.  ^Ji*Jt.  21.  L«b. 


t5jLa.l  "L:^  ^  I4JL*  j^^  "iVNB>^n  nn^oij  B'^c^  n:t:^n  yt^  »jlxj  (^jJl  Jua^Jl  jy  L^jl.    v  J-^j 
^^Uii^.  ^Lu  Uli    ♦  Jj-fli  A...  t'w  (sUi  iU*  KHiai?  B'i'K'  DiB'a  I4JL.  ^^  u^^   '  (i^\^ 
,j*JLi  ptnJl  Ulj  esUU-*  AJ,^^  ^  (jU^.'ci  U^i  JLJb  s^oj   c^jJl  ^Ut\  IIaj       ^^ 

^^*i.    8^  ^^^^    (*-'-V    J^ili    Ulj    (sUU-o    iliiJl    »_*i  ^,^    Jj    Jj^l    (slUl  ^S    li-^ 

^Iplj  eJLdlj  i^jjU*.  j^UJlj  j.bil  ^y  sT^  U  jjk  Lftu-  Jj^U     ♦  j,--.AJLS  j;E  JUb 
t_fijL5j     ♦  »^_kjJl   ^   5L5J.   s^bj    jjic   dJi   J«i^j   ^^-^^^3   iXj^l    (Aj   »,.:l.:^  ^o 

ana  N»^n  t^y^    ♦  nnitsn  {j>''n  »UL-  dJjJj  i:;j5C"  XsUil  Ji*  «-i^l  s^J^y  UJte 

Lo  Jjl  u.  ^\j\  lul  J^j  14Jl£  Jj-Ol  j.ldl  ij_^^  ^Jl  ii-<J   J^  nDN   pi^D  E'Nn 

IjU   (J^^    ^  (^  JbLvo    (^  ^b    fjyjS  (JS\ja   (JIa31l>   (_,xajsx^   r 

4  if^Jb  (y/9  20 

»jl.^<^*  XLCj   k*^^  ^;^^  ^j  ^^r^^^  y^^  is^U^  Jb,    «j,l    15^,  »jl  v_Jj:c 
jj^  (-iSlj  8Jl  *Ldl  ^y  (jl^  »il   ((jbt)  J^.  llaj   uyUl^-w^    aj^^I   sxa  lU-o  i^yXt-* 
iJl^-L»    u-a-tfj  ^JJ    Jl»1     *j       ♦   eylilj-j^    ('H^^'    ""^    *-^    uyJot-^    ^Xj*    >^     la-i» 


*  nN->N1  codd.         2  }n!j  PQ;  p^  cett.         »  ^j^^^  ^j.  ^^^^  ^^^^ 
Line  5.  iUjs:*.         9.  L^-jJU-o.         12.  iJj-JU.         15.  bj^X*.         17.  LUb. 


11  ♦    ^Ia>10^^aj,j    ^^  * 

wolj   8jUs*^  v**Jj   »^   Jj*.  (jJui   *-Ja-xi  [^;-»]  »J^^^  »— ^J  *^^  "-^  t5^  Uj   t,*-::^! 
ijJLa.   jy  uybl  »J    ^_5:l*j   NjnN31   N^DB'n   pHOm   pflN  lajn   »J>5j     ♦  Jo^.    ^  ^^j 

♦  °^*U]Li.*  *A/-^  •-'-''Jj  Vy^l^'  pU~J^  fj^  ]y^j^ 

L^Lvo    cJUilo    jt^'^    cJ^W    '^^  ^L<<a.<i».UJ    (^L)«.a.l    zUaw    ^__5i    I   V 
^^j  iXj  ^JJ^\  j»Ldl  11a  ^  U^  ^/.  eUi  ^^  ^jl  ^  ^/.  J*  eUi  a^.  (-a5j 


*  PVTQI  pnniaD  codd.  2  Ins.  p  only.  =•  Dnn^j  3V31  Dnaxb  ihvNI  codd. 

*  DHNQija  Q ;  DnDSJN  P. 

Line  11.  ib^  uj/*^  u^'j* 


^^^.(sUj  J*l  j^  Ji=--J  ju  J*ij  jj  »j\  c?,^  may  vh  rhsin  vch'Q  lonp  fjKi 

1^15^  ^\    is-J   s^j      ♦  ctUil    J^-i*    (sUi   1^Xs2-"U   Jl-Jb    xjlj^j    dJli  j,j;-Jl  15 


^  hw^l  codd.  2  -jlj^p,  (50^^  s  jj^3>  B^ 

Line  2.  IcLa^,  ^L^'^M.         8.  ^L».         lo.  ,*^-^.4-         i6.  U^.         19.  ^i^^. 


*  cJyOiO  JLo^  r*/***  * 


^  0^-^  J^l  s^\ji\  v--^  Ul  *V  u^  cr*  u^  u^^  r*^  C^  |J  ^^^  ujJ^  cr* 
'  ».l^j     ♦  (—a-s-Jb   ^A^j   .LJb  J^^^Uii*.  |»«^  ^jIjj   SjJi^bJ   cL*— Jl  jjl  »jj>J» 

5  eUi  ^U^Jj  csUi   Jots  s-oLrJ   p  tl\\  ^\  esUil  JlxJj  sy^lTjJ  ^^jil  s^iiij  ^^ 

♦  2uic  ey^  ^'^y*J  2i^W  cMwj^ 
JojJj  -^ij  ^y*ll  *juj  jLib  Jic  »Ji5  ,,5^1  j^ijo  B^  •'W  DW"in  nita  lj^ 

(^<>5«  i^Clli  (_,AAa=v/o  ci*\w  c::>v«iV  ^Z***  cJi*^^  o*  ^i*^  t)-.^  fi 
^Jic  vcmU  o:>1  c5c>3i  ^b^l  Jlj^l  »b)b5^  JMt>  W.  JtoitjJ  JSU 

ev^a*  e^  ^•tVuJb.  jj«    clxttJi   j»i  cJllc*  JfcT^  vi*Jt>   ^^^i  rr 
*  IV  nn  Q^l  all;  perh.  Lijl  (»*  »Jj-  **  P^*"^-  ***^-  kS"^"  '  ''^'*'^^^  ^°^^' 

*  HN^Dsn  B. 

Line  2.  I^JlSli.  3.  sj*^.  4.  »i^.  6- j;^-  7- ^j^i-^* 

16.  ,jtfi.  18.  UL-j. 

I  2 


JLJb    jJLo   ^   j^   J^  jjlTnil    |,y   j^   Jdlj   »JLC   J|=-**j*   (»4Jj^   <--iJli*   ^^  f  J-Ai 

♦  ^yLj  kJ  la^  elUl  ^;5C^  Jii        " 
jklcl   <£X^  ^Jj\i«  i^Cm   ^_^Xc  UasvA,!  (JLayJ^   «^^jl  O-^^aa*  <"« 

g*J    (-4^   uy^'   J'   «^^J^  !>^   U^jj'   CyJl^      ♦  (sUS   Jus  j^Ij   lub    ^^U   ^ 
^^  ^^  j.4i^.  |J  ^WJl  JU  J\  JLob«  \^  ^^.11\  *Vj  "^  (^j^  j^l' 

j^  ilj  Ijjk  ,_^j^b  »ji)  cy«JI  j^  (sUsri  jji  JjjJl  JLc  iJl-ju  tjjj!  sill  ^^1  ^ 

♦  dUi  *A^J^  eli-b:  iybLa.1  ^^jJl  *^^  20 

♦  cJLolj^  oV^^^AxXi.  ;^^  s^t:^!  (*^^^  s^l^u 

1  anm  C;  anns  cett.  ^  ^l,^  c.  "  Om.  C.  *  Om.  C.  \Ins.  C  D 

only.  «  T^5^  C.  '  Ins.  C  only.  «  nw^J^  K  D  (in  ras.);  pHN^K  cett. 

»  ijN^ani)  c. 

Line  l.  UJlir*  etc.  14.  Ulli*. 


' ''  OJ^^  ♦  i5^lkJl,    '\^^\  ^   JU.^1    'iljij   jl^  ^j  ^JU:  y^ 

CyOi'J.i^    O-wuOl    i^3X\    Ja^;    (..f^    t^CUU    {jAl\3»    \yO^JlLS    o^Xa^.    \r 

♦  cJjy^  b)  L5^^  (->«j^  (^oU  jCUuT  p^jJJCJl  UAJij. 

l^\i   «J^   ikJLc   I^Jloaj   eJLUl    ^JJ^   JyiJI   ijuk   1^A«.yj   Uu    cL^I   vjl».   ^\   ^«^ 

♦   SJCAL  c^Us   p»*<S^^    ;_5»   Cyliul   JMLbj    vSA^^J^xi^   L^t>3i    Ja^/^U 

Jk:^!    e>^   2udc  c^xsus  j».AiaC  j^^JX)!   It^Jb  ^**.aw  UT  t^CJ^i   c>^*^*>vA.   le 
j-Jlc  aLJJ  l^JU-C  ^1   ^jlfJ  JWJ'->  >•  (4/*-  ^  I— aJU*  (^JJl   ^,1  ^^   iL^M  US 


»  2^50  PQD  (corr.);  y:b  X;  3*33  Kj  3*3*3  B D.  =  Qm.  C.  "  inn?  p 

N-|t3N  C.  ♦  Perh.  Ui^.  "  HNJyD  B  K. 

Line  i6.  U*b.g. 
[II.  3.]  I 


jj^o  jjj  8^1  ,^  t-JLkj  !i)  U5  i«j.U.  ju».l  ^^  jus.1  L-Akj  ^^1  \j.x^^^     *  »-»--^  J  '  •  Jr"^ 

t^ui  ^^  t^  (JJiJ.  u-ui  u_aL"  5)^^  dJi  ^^  i3  :^  ^  uaj^i  ^^j^,^  dLUb 

(jy  (sUil  y.«^  ^*^b  taU j  ^^  Xj  u-^li  1*4^  u^j*^  j*^l^J  lA*-*.  tJ^  (•^-'^  5 
Uii     ♦  jJfljLijj  dlUl  J  k*-ajL3  ^i)l  II4J  ^^1  »_5^^  eUi  jJj  uLi.  I^JL-J  »:^1  JJ^ 

♦  :^l  Jj>x.  !^J  JLjIjJ  i^jJl  i5CJuAl 

D^Knn^  n33  JUj     ♦  Juo  jjt  lilj  s^^^  ,^Jlc  Uju  l^i^l  j^:ii  (ipCJl  ^^ 

«X»j  dJi  ^aj  u'J>?^  ^  ^-r*^'}^'  s^l^  'j^  J*«J   ^jlS^Ub  Ul  Ju:  dUi  Jjj 
U^  ^  »jl  LlJLc  \nw"a  ^y  nm  JU  U^  onnvi  ipni  nny  I4JI  ^yb  u^lSjl  UiUl  20 

:  utjnv  ^v  ^jsb  n^inj  nyisji  r\)nnm  wn  Jy  dU ji^  ii^l  ,  .n:?  o^vn 

^^JloX^  C^^-i^  (J^6^^t>  l^O^jj  W=»^^  4J^:P^  »^b)^i  ^XUa.  ir 
'  Prob.  add.  dLUl.  »  Prbb.  ^^.  '  (^^^Lij^  .  .  .  Ulj  om.  BD  K. 

*  piii'N  P. 

Line  12.  J.<su..  13,  !!lUli.  22.  LJUs  etc. 


1  j-fli    (^v^  /-^ij  cJ\-A>^tv  c>^vi  o*<y  cy-^i^S*-*  cJ^-^^^'  «^b^^'  <^y^^-6^  '' 

»-J   liol^      J\   J-aJ    l^Ls   (sJJlJ.1  i-frjfc    ^^   ^-aj^  ».-Jlc   IjJtsH!  ^jl  l^-~ol  U,   uJl   *— 9]J^ 
[jj]    u^    It)-*^    f*^^    (^>    '^'^    ^    ^J^3    (*A^V    U^    ^3    "^    "^    (>*-•    (_^ 

i^CU\    ^_^    {]y4^\yi    (SfiSj)    \y^^^     'Ix'i^U    KijUaJl    c>a^a^    v 

♦  Oi»Ac^jJi  Jl  \SXro  {J:jJ^]o  sJ  oiJili  L^i>J* 
(JUjtlL  'l^c)-==v3U  *!y<'b)^  *^j;^\j  '^-^^  'yi^lkj  (jy  U^.Lics  A 

io(.,>:^  (^!  L5^'  '^^^  W^-^  '^^  t>^  pv?.  e><vi>^  (__^^  c>mUJ!  (_y^* 

(JJlo    JUXa  ^    (^y^^=»-  ^as\}\  ^j>^   ial^l    vj>^a3    t^CUi   L^^j   (^Isjl   "i 

»-JLc  (jiJ^-iJ  eUi  (sUil  J-«i->  (J  ijlj  J-»-*^  (j^  '-r^-  t^-^  "-^Ij  u*"^^  »^».«.W.>  j^jUa 
^J«LJ1    jJlc  j^.   |_^   dki.    c^\    J   yi5   ^1   J      ♦  sJoifc    -^    ^j    !iJ-J   ^j    (*4^]/! 


*  nxani  codd. 

Lines  i,  7.  ^j^lS.  7.  eUil,  ,jix.  lO.  U^..  12.  e/^1),  t*^" 

22.  Leo. 


NITl^   ni"l   8-*i    i.iA.*a.    j^   (s)Jj   Jjti   si!   *— s/ij    »y*|»    t^\j    j^   ^1   t-i   *4.^   J^lj  J'*^ 
Jllsri    lijjk    ^jO    eUll    ^jl    v-ijic    ^       ♦   iL«J    8^1.    lul^    (J-s:*^    ^«  j^   sJ-s^    U*'-J^  1° 

JLob  »_-wfl-Lj  ^^1  ^  Jjl  ^^  jj  J^  |J  sjli  lij^j  JLoU  J*sij  (sU^jl  Jko  ^J\  ^^jj 

^.flKJg)     ^  j\^\    iljjJl     V^     J^     V     ^-^    J\     ^^~     VUJI    \^     U^     (-^     J^- 
^^     SjjtliJ     8-JLC    AJuil     jJ    Ijjjfcl    dLlJJ     frt     \yL»-    LJli    J-viSi    J-jJ^     ^ft&lJLj     ^L» 

Jy/^1  dJJ.1  15 

oyi^JJ  cJ^^  o^  e^  o^^^  !^l5'  *^^b^^^  ».»^UaJi  t^-tyNA.  0 

♦  jlaIc  eyf>r^4  L^  bUuJ*  »Lic  (JT*  jUJ>  xil  vi^-iS^-  ty^ 

(jjJl    Ju*Ji   A4».    ^    (sUjj   sJ^stolj    iLjiJ    (Jlc  \yisS\    *|^^!    Xj*  Aj,lkJl   ^j1   »— ij!c 

(^   A-W*-   lH    J*-*^   ^]j  ^^j^    ^-^4*   li-*^   U-il    eUil   ^jl  l^Ui  &JL-4  *4JjJl5  Jjfcb  20 


'   Prob.  aLjp.1. 

Line  i.  Ij^Jo.  4.  Uj!,i^  etc.  5.  U.,^.  14.  ^LJlS  etc. 

21  (2nd).  ^. 


^jl    Joi^    U-^J    U^J^^    iJ^^   1^^    U^J   "'^^    \}y    JWJ'->    J>*t!    U^    U-j4;'->    j»A* 

9  &, : ^ : >..    t_i.lj^^  (sUi  Jjj.1  j^;-%j  iU-»  (sUll  JL-jlj  jj-o  8.-Jlc   *o  jJJl   ^l3l  Sjl-JI 

djl»  (j-«  ^j  D''13J\  djJu  ^^  y^  ^jXj  J  Uj  jj-»^lx-Jj\  ^^  csUIl  JL-J  oJj 

Jjjj   J  »5Jl«  ojj   iJ   i^  Liij^  jJ  [j4*]  ij^^*-*   *-^   "^^^^    {j^"^   ^^^    J^lr**^ 

15  ♦  (sUi  U 

[z^^^pJl  ev<]  (•.^Xo  t>.^L  cJUlilo  cJjJ^  HJ^Ua>  jd>;sjj>  j».4X<  ^]^  r 

♦  (^i3U<  i^!  t^.  ;:^^b)^  (^  t^^^.  'lyo^J^  'b)^  L^.  L^xa. 

iJ    Jjcar?    ijljJuJl    ^^    jJb    J^lj    J5J    j^-^\    ^;;J/<^    ijU.1    *^    J*?*    «->-»^    c)-o 


^  Supply  ^j\  lU^  Xj^  ij^  ir   i5CL  o^j.  2  p  DQX;  |»  }S  BP;  prob.  U. 

Line  4.  !^  etc.        7.  ijj^u>j  ^JbJLJl.         17.  \y^^,'         20.  ^j.i-»-«.        21.  Ijij. 

22.  \Xs^y 


«  C:>l^^yyjiX>4   (j>%«   Oc)X  Oc>C   /»j«Jo^   v-5c>3^   JasOl   l<>Aj    t-d 
♦    C>w;li«    L^C^U    OA^U    k^^Xo    e^>,jUik^   vAjUxSJ    ^a  . 

».s^-»^     Jl-^    (_r**^.    ""i^j   *-*^J    (^   u^  "^   *-^^    isJJi^    sJljj*.!  ^L-j    »-4>>5    !U*5C».«  15 

J-i-e  lsJ^«-'J    cy};-**>»XJ'  pO'ia  ^;-^J        *  JLasIJ    Jl^l    Ji    Jj    dJS    jj-a    ^  jJi    l^J   l>*-Jj 

»Ji:i3  jjfcj  OiJ  (^ji**  Jlc  pDIQ  Jl5  Uilj  [^,^Ji5Cjl  loib   pDnD  JU  dJjJj  jilxij  jCL 
pons  JI9  dlJjJj)  j^^-wo1jl*JJ1  (»1LL*  Ju-jU  ^;15  ^^  Ji  jsjoo   ^^  t-JJu  dJi  Juoj 

*  Om.  B.         2  B  adds  dsb^N  Tiyi  Tli?D  n^H;  perh.  add.  dJu/ 

Line  2.  ^_jJl.  II.  ujjl,  Up.,  U-U.  12.^^1.  14.  LaSlj,  Lilj. 

22.  IW.I». 'i-o. 


(\'^S  o^    iojSk^    pvl*^^    e^-^Ju^    5^*,«   iu.l>  ^A4^   Uo   c)-^5   ''• 

SUjtu^     *l.4^1     L^C>>^     eV<*5     Ti^y^Xa^,^yfj\    (JJL/«    OjuaC     ^1*1^    (jikT^J^ 

15  O^U   <^\o^  Cx^^i^   *^  LJ^b^ J  vj^ai;^  'UjuJI    i^y^   C5^5   '''" 

»joi31    T^^^j    j^4^    oH^^  ^;4^\    isOiUei)*    ^l^^jo.;    t*n^s)j^L 

e>^b  ^^   cJc>31  ^^^-sojsJU   (_^AJUicsEv3U  c>^.cVs=JU   CjuuI:svA)L  c^<>3U 

20  ijl^^  J>i9  »!».  jJlc  (^^  U  J5  v-i^^^LiJb  ^jl  ^Jlc  Jjj  nvT  nn  i>3  '•t  »Jji 
«-ilii^-"'j  s-Jlc  .Ijoil  »il  »^^1  e**j  ^y|^^  nJ^'  u^  *^  [»^     *  (slJJ^.  *-r'^^  U^  ».ig-^M> 


liine  I.  LijU.  etc.  7.  L-ix.  11.  jii.  16.  (jjJ,^.i  etc. 

H  2 


«»    ■ 

sXwili  jUXsh.*  (JkistlU  o-^j>\^  t^A»  7f^^!  ^^^  (i/l  t^l^  e>3Uuo^  ii» 

JaaaJl  !<>A  (j>*  Juj  (j>>j»jui4U   *UX=sv31  (^^t)«*  l^i^O  jUluJU    lo        5 

♦  JLLjuXi  i£^^  (j9  (.*Ji«  i^Juc  ^__^  o^<3  ^^5  o^v^i^ 

!*3jo.   *^    ^liUac   t^lUl    f*^c)-*    (J^^^    cJyV^^t>   (,>Asv«   ^IXa,:^    iv 

^    ^LC   si^    M    ^_^1    U-Aii];    ^^^    J    Ujta.\     *LJj^    s^Si    U-o    L-i.    SJU    (_^jb    J 


^  nionpm  B  K ;  nonpni  d,         ^  i?in  B.         ^  Nnm  pi  B  d  K ;  om.  Nnm 

PQX;  prob.  s^^JlST 

Line  I.  LoUjLx-il.  2.  I,^(^.?. <■  5.  UjlJ  ^jjijjt^l.  9.  LiU.  13.  kcl. 

14.  L^L 


i^jtll  IJ4J  Job  (J\  ^jJ'^  x^  xJl  dUi  j^  ^i/^j  J->.^  t^^  /«-»>  <sU3  juxjj  ^^c^ 
pn^JN  no3n3  hd^Hj  unbtj'j  n\n3j  pn^N  nn  ^^j  *Lwi.l  i«j,b  J^^l  j^Uli  ^y 

»--i.illj     *  laiiJl^^li^q  U.-ijOj^  laAlll  ttUi  J^UJ  i*j,ill  i>jO  e:^^  ^UJl  J_^UJ1  ^y^ 

^  ]'^'^j2p  Nie'iDi  p^HN  n^inxi  ND^n  ntJ'BD  L0I3  Jj^ii!  JjLo  iJn^B'j  pni'N  n»3nD 

10  »-s^j  i*ij^f^!  JjL«  ju^  L«  »^.>>^  c!>^  u^  **^  ''"^"''"'^  *^^  U^  "^^j  'l"*'''"'^  J*^JJ 
l^\^ji]\  L^  't-i'^l  y^JoJ  lul  UUx-.j  N-IB>  nioy  N"l"inJ1  iIiL«;^l  iiJ  ^yJJI  I4JI 
»-*JL».  *j>>Jtil  (•W^^  ^J^  »-*^  ^  NITl"*  mi  »J^     ♦  W^J^  i_aj_j^^^4Jiii  (jU.llall  ^J 

eyUUil   Jl  ^,-jJLj>  pD^n  ■IB'aO     ♦  lal.;,.:  .....^1   jLc   ^  unl'^tj'i  Ulj     *  niDDn  !j33 

,5  ij.»JLi  pntap  NiB>»i  )TnN  n^nNi  Ulj    ♦^^js^^^^^^pJ  ^  J  c^  U  Jjlo  *^*^i\ 

20  i^iAjLil  L&LJl  dLai-  Lo  »is4  ^(J)  w)^^^  ^^  *■**  u^  ij-*  *^^     ♦  dLlj  Jj^l  ^^-o 

♦  dLiS  Jjt-i.  Jy^^  ^r*^j  l/^j  *i.5^  *^^  iUJUfc 

^Ia^Ij.)   (J^^5  oj'^ss'-^     *  t^CUl   plt>i  <J^ol   cJW*^<^  <>^-^AA.  ir 

oW  Lic>i!  c34^a3!  c><  ^aJLskJ!  t>b!U^  cko  c^ij-'^^  (JW>^<^  y^  o^i 


^  nvya  codd.  *  ^^y^  p  x ;  text  B. 

Line  3.  Lolff.  16.  Loj 

[II.  3.]  H 


o^]j  »-Jl*  ]y^    J   Uli    »/-^-«*ij    »jfP^J    fis)^^   (J^  CiJ^   HijU^    ij^    J-^.   u^  «J-<^ 

1^1^    (SlLJi    Jjj.\    ^^j    U]^    y    »^j    JlJI    c5;J    ^,15    lul    X*-0    ^j    »jp  ^/^J    8.1-iufcJ     ^  J^-^J 

•^V>***t)-?.    ^    cH^    o^^c    «^^i    ^3    cyJli*    sSSW    o*.-?^^    viyJ^O 

^^^JJIx'j    »_^j    **-Uj«>    r^J    ^*^'5   iiJ^l    ^;-«    8-iL    Lo    ^J\    u.  jLi.\    t07t3    ''7)0   71p7 
jju:   (— iijj   kiJ   IJlA   s-JlC  °\jM   ^j\  iiy   w    ^^   C5«H^^  ^  »-^|^   »-^'^   Jj*^-i   t5JJ^   (^^^ 

,^^X^j   2ui  eyc)«^  ^^b^b)^   zUCsxT  jUX^  c)i«3U  <>Aipi   »^>ol   P»l5j  15 

♦  4^^1  i^S^  jUj«ai 
c:>U>Ui^ ^^AlIlsiA'  (J.ic^  '5J;j»/oj  'iXf^  p.*^  8;a«  c5c>3i  «3>s^  ev"  if 

♦  ^^AsAJi^^AuvixJU  ];.Jii   cJW*^^   jUljuJl^UajtukA,^   JUajo!  /J».ax»   i^3\\  20 


^  Nnp^  IN  ni  ND  Nin^  nIj  B  ;  perhaps  ^  Jib  j:»  ijX^^  ^.      ^  QO^pl,^^  p  x ; 
text  B.  3  niD3n  or  nmn  codd. 

Line  3. Ijj. 


5  jj    iJ    ^1    sjjo    ^^j_*J    (JjUj    (^jLl»j    (,_^ufe  JJl    (J^JaJ    »-^>J«r!j    'ii'^^     vW^    O-""*^-;!    u^ 
^1^    ^^    »J    J-aa.    j_5i.    (Jl    Jl*^    HJl    ^J£■   ^y^   Ijuij    CtUil    ^y   (sHJ;^    »Jl*^.    Jj    lUl 

_^U::ir*.   JJb   Jj      *  viJiiJl  i(.-J  sJ  ^JU   jtJL-o  »-^  dULJU  ,jO  ^y:*  l5|^  is-lU  J  ^JS 

ujj^ii  ^L«  (2ui5^  Till  j-5  ;^ij  ^1  j-j  mnii  wo  ^j^  :ajl.  vjii-^ 

JLiU  »j^  lil  ,_jLa.  eU  1j  s-is  L;^/^  u^  -^Vj  '  »;?.>"«'  ^-Mj  c>4^  p^  W  "-^^^^-^ 

»^\jL^    ^r*^}    ^^    U"l)    (j^    *-*.    »-4»^    Uj    s-Jolir^    jjl    ^;_^A_«1    J    s^Jlij    »^^    ^jjj 

^  Piniri  codd.  ^  Perhaps  spurious.  ^  N''N6y^N  X.  *  Apparently  something 
is  lost.  ^  Or  ^U?     Cp.  Index.  «  ^Ijp^  X;  text  B  etc.  ''  Prob.  ci^UJCjl. 

^  Dn  1313a''  B  X ;  prob.  UjI.Wpj.  *  Perh.  jlSj. 

Line  2.  bJlj.  5.  jL^j.  7-  ^^^J/^-  12.  ^j^Jj>b. 

14.  Ujjfc^  twice.      Lil^.  15.  LoyiaJ^,  li^.  16.  l^^LLo.  21.  U-*Jflg- 

22.  ,j4^.1s^^  etc. 


Ji*  I4-J  i-j/^.  u^  Ji-aj   viy^l^   ^_5»J  li-Ui   Ca^   i^b^-  ^'ir^  u^  -^^  ^r^  J  jj     « J-^ 
^,i>Ai31   *l<>r^   ^y^^   (^Uwil   t)-?.  AiUo!*  e>ia«y^   etf^J^   ^__5*  o 

l/l^  JlSj  (joiAJ'   ^j    cl^jJl^   Jj  cy^  iJcii  (jl^   8Jl   jJlc  Jjj»   NT  DS  sJ^   ^^-a         10 

••i  nya3  T"  hmi  J^  \xa  x^.  JLJh  sJUloj  T"  rh^^  JjiS^k5i  jo  ^  Jli^^sri  jow*,    3  .n 
(J\j    U3    u*J^    i_59    u^  u^'  !/<^    dj-*    "^^  J^3  °^^  uW^'  -t?-"^    ^ 

♦  eyLj^Ui  «'c3«^)  w<>A  $-^«  eNA^saX^ 
»^j    »_J_tf  jji    CaIW    sJXc,    s^   ^j^    cji^    iXiij    s-La-b    aj^l    iXa    JuiLi.   li 

♦    t^^!^!    iXa^»    t-J^^aJ 

*  asj  njN  (or  NJN)  codd.        ^  im^N  r]i6i6  P;  nm  D3x!?N  HN^JN^  D.        3  After 
^  most  MSS.  ins.  ni?  (not  B  D).  *  ynXN  codd.  ^  nj'.t^^joo^K  codd. ; 

perh.  ia.^Li^^  (cp.  Vullers,  s.  v.)  ^  nV2i?N  B  D.  ''  \>T\2  N^fl^  ''I  all 

(BDKPQX).  8  JN^3  JN3Q  Bj  jN^a  fN3D  D.  «  N)DO  B  D  K.  lo  n^>an 

codd. 

Line  5.  UUs**"'.  lo.  ll^  ii.  Ijo.  i6.  iLs^.  19.  jLl*. 


^JLfi  (^^^s^^'  <sUj  Jjj.1    (^j   ksL..  »Jl  J-J»  Lo   jts»».  ^^\  ^j  (sHJJu  l^^y-.  syjjJi 

«  t-^^^  *a*1jl»  jjfc  ^jl^  «-JLs*  ^  yiS  _^1  u_»j>  N"iion  atha 

15  ♦  °5Jiiljoj»4  ja^,^  ^^^j^U 

Lic>31  J^W^   ev^  S^v^^  Lic>^^   0>^t>^l   (^S^   W^W"  t>^^^^^  >" 

20  «    »:a«.,sOu  (_>AJuacJu 

^_^L.  u^^j  eiM  J^  il^^jCj\  ^J\  M  i\j\  »Jl  »^  J^  NIDn  QyiD3  sJy 

^  ni'O^N  DNyta  all  (B  D  K  P  X).                        ^  Prob.^^-^  '  '•Nl  codd. 

*  O^Ujj  — M^j  om.  D  P  X  ;  ins.  B.             '  11^3  D  X ;  text  B  etc.  «  rh)p  D ; 
'pa  cett. 

Line  I.  ULjtL  etc.          6,  9.  jb.  7.j^,.s^^'.          16.  j_yJl.  21.  L»L». 


^^y;s\4^  fjSXc  y.  ^J\^  oyiS  ^^  (J^j^  e>»yi  <^o  ^y  ^^        ''J^ 

C5^    <^    C^::^];    (^l^cVi    u^^4W.    (Jj    t>c    ty^.    J^UriJ)  ""Ij^ 

ujptJ  »^U\  ^  J  nana  nxijyh  u.  ja:^^  iin'-  "ijy  ^yn^Di  plsj  U  ,y  Jls 

ijflJiJLj     ^    sJl    *— O^    nTTl''    n"l"l    sJ^j        ♦    »jS,j    »jJJ>.lj    SpUjJl    i-JJaJ    »J>^J    (.5^ 

^J    Jjj:   KJl    «^«-J*    (^   dJi   ijl5j  j!cj   a-!.*Jk    85^]^    Jo    *XJ1    SJ    J*  ixAJLC    j^AJLit 

^  tjSj  ^J  :>|)j   ^Ul   i_j^  ^j  A-j^l   J   jails'  ^1Jv::j^I^   ^L-JJlj    JJoJl  (sJ^j  <_^U1  10 

Jl  fjAs.  Jjjl  lijJj  ijl   j,j5  JU)  eUil  ^jo   ijlS  JLib  ^\  j,y  JUi  c-*j1^  eJlo 

^:Li»   fr^\   cyJ^AJ   t-*^  jy   ^-^14^*    ^^   iJj^    i;)-*   J-o-sJ^   ^J^   A,  6  !>'^-g   ^   J^   w^ 
^ic  s^  jlo.    (jfJlJi    ^X-^    »J^  u-ajlati   *U--J1    csUi    /"/*J    ^^^   \Jl    Jl5    ^^b    isJJi 
j-K»LiLb   >-<^  7J<J4  J^^  (%J     *  j^li jjs^^-ji  ^^^-^»  j^  ijo  L«  ^i.1  1  juij     ♦  jJLjtil   JL*» 
»--oJ  ^j^  i.^^  Ui  iu-0  c5/s^  |J  (j^  r.'b/*  •J'-j'  ''^*^  -/^  ^•^  ^^  "-^J  cr'J  j-*j  20 


M         1 


*  nxin  B.  '^  niDDi  Pin{i>D  k  x  ;  nnotti  ^Wi  d.  ^  i'ssDni'i'  coda. 

♦  7 'T  s-^LlJI  |,U5  ^^  sW*r^ ^^  r»^  (V  ;>^j^  ''''^^J  ^'     ^^®  Appendix. 
Line  7.  l^j»yir!.         9.  IJc.         15.  ^j^jL*.         20.^;^. 


^-^^     (^c3Ji    «jyAs\^    «^>ac4^  j^(^\    (^J^j    ey^^   ^^IslIJ.    ^J^    oyts 

svcSA^'^  ^d.^*^-   e>-^    0-^3    lm*a3«    l>^^^    e/^-^j    *Uau3l    ^jii^AA.^ 

^  (jSjjj.^1   ^^.   8-«^  ^ykjJ   idac   ».JLi:    Jta^    piiy   nySB^  oJIiu   Uj   »jl  v— »/i 

10  u^  ^-Jp^J  Ny">«  ^*1^<^  ij^i  Jy^     *  ,^.05;.^  JoJ;  *4JlkLuj  ^^l  j_^.  dULo  u^ 

Ij^   (sDj    ^j    ^J-<j^-flJ-o    (^.>.9:..i»    1^^    (_5^    ^^j-.^ir»  ^^    ^Ji^.-ot-ej    (»^^/-rt^ 

iT'avoai  »Jj5j     ♦  (sUi  ^  ^^^^LJlj  *Lw-Jiil  Jj».ja  ,j«^  j^^'j  *-^iA'  ly  »«j^-->j 

^,  J\  8J  j.-^  nil  [UjI]  ^;Pw(  Njnx  nxn^  Jy^  « "ksL-^j  ^r-^j"  «-a-JC1j  j_^\ 
♦  ^j\yJ^  J\^  i^  jj*jo  »jl  Lijl  J-.^:^j  n^K'yoi  K»TiDi  n^noi  n^oD  siU  ^^1 
m^3  nno*  Jy^  Nyns  nxni  n>db>  ^^n  s-^j  (*^  nn^a  nn»^  ""T  ^h'n  n^i  Jy^ 

aojJJiJ    ^j   8^];^   ^^  It  IT ; , )    NyiN  nsil   N^Dt^  ^^n    ^^  J^l  ^J^  il  JUi    c^l    Jplj 

T.n"?np  «JL11  J*i  S^  ^jdj  J  i^jJI  sLl^o  »....^.)  »j^  isUiy^j  nti'yn  n»  li?  "ion''  idi  Jy 

1  B>ia  X;  text  B  etc.       ^  p,^,  ^1,^  X;  text  B  etc.       ^  m^DNDN  P.      *  NnijvijNI  P. 
5  »j  —  J\  om.  DX;  ins.  B  etc.         «  Om.  DP.         ''  NTin  or  N-nn  codd. 

Line  4.  ^^^ .i..-c*.  10.  ^jiiLLo.  ii.  jjv<>Ji-i-«  etc,  12.  ^^LaJl*. 

14.  ij^LJIj. 

G  2 


Jl^tl    Jli   JjiJi  IJuk  eUi   (JLc   u-sLflJl.   t_-^   *J   Uli  *LJtl   SyJoJ   Ca3j  JJU  AJLi*.   iJJl 

*  (sUi  ij-UJl  JLx-J   JiLcl  jjfcj  i^jXzy\  sji^^  !ul  J»::-srjj  15 

^yijkt  ^^   C^^^^    ^■>'^2A>    2Uaur^     *\-Mu3!    C_5c)^    (>^^    (J^.  J^\    (J^ 
♦^4>\ia3\  (^^aJ^-sev/o  (J^  ^likL   'i^YijJ^Y jsJjo  (J^A/0 

A-oUfcj    W.>^:^    Jj    AjJ-Jl    ^J1    (jJlil    JilxAj    »-4^j    ^^    sjLj  JIbj    «^^    ^    »sjj  20 

^^  j_pa,j  eJJ.!  jy?  ^  jsUj  JjJ  n3">  pnK>J3 


^  nnvp  D  P  X ;  text  B.           2  p|5nn3^  Q  X ;  text  B  etc.           »  So  all  (B  D  P  Q  X) : 

so  too  MS.  2467,  p.  132  a  (ad  Ex.  xix.  4).  *  pi'pyn'»  D  Q  X  P  (corr.  in  marg.); 
text  B.         ^  Prob.  Jjj  Ulj. 

Line  3.  U-*l^.     9.  i^^U.     11.  ^jj^^U?,  LjLp.  16.  L-i^j.     20.  LplJ.      21.  ^^^JL*. 


»«J^     n^WJ^   u^^  i^^  ^\  Js.  J  JO  Ijukj    iT^y  D-p^   D^C'JN  i>SB>1   J^  t^Ul^l 

w 

— ^*~~'     LSJ^Ij  J^  ^"'»N  ni  J^ii"°^LiJl  <*--JiJl>^^i  J     *  »Jao  (^JJl  J«^l  ^y  eUi 

JJUJLJ    y<*Jj    (gU    ^_^b    (gUil    ^^1  ^    »-J    J^tl  ^y^'    (ij/i    J-»l    \^\    JUj    Oot^-. 

«'  .1  'pin'  iii^l  j^j  pan  ni2ob  op  ODnn  s-^i  Jyi^i^Ul  Ji^  ^^  ^;15  wl  JLc  Jjo  11a 

»JJ1  »_*SUj  JJiS^\    ^JJ^   ^J^;.t^J^    ^jir^'^    cH^J    f*/^    OJ"*    [»fta^g   cin^   U^  »j^ 

D»n  psn  nxi'D  ^3  Jyi  UU.1  ^^  h3Dn  nn  elUl  uTljjJI  ^U  ^_j9  L^JU:  ^ 

J^^  c_5*  LijJi   '^^  J^  C5^  i^  t/^  <-^^'  '^i>^  n 
^  nn^nijN  codd.  ^  Dni>  PQ;  Cn^ij  DKX.  Mn  B;  om.  cett. 

*  nK^ywHN  P  X. 

Line  4.  jb.  10.  Uj-*,.  12.  ^\1aj  etc.  13.  U-^Jlc,  U^i*-!. 

i/^.\y\3.         17.  \_».<JL».         23.LjL*.. 

[II.  3.]  G 


r  .1  -0. 

n  .a  n:ii 

I 


» Jlii  J  ^ci  ^yj  JJij     ♦  JLsJl  ijW^  ^Ji  *•^^^3  '^'^^  J^  *^^  ii-:^j  s-^i  j»aL:^j     f  J^ai 
»j!)Ij1j  s^^Lj:  ^^^-.^  n^aty  .Tsv  ^y  ^\jX\j  N^JB'  nn^Ni  -i"'BB'  iTsjji  jj^U  ^^---jj  ^^  ^r  jj^U 
na  N^^i?  proi^^-v--^)    ♦  u^-^^  cr*  »^*'?  c?^'  J^^  !/^  j^  ^^^^  nnJNi ^,.-w-^j    — "" — 
yu.  ^_jJl  ^^IkJl  JjjIjj    ♦  AjjUl  Kin  nvn  ^ijton  \ninnn  Jy^     *  ^\jj\  yb 
Vrx^^Z  ^3  pm"'  n3»1  Jy^     *  »iCL  oj:^  \yS^\^  »iCL  ^  l^L^^j  jJb  ^  ^^  vJl  5 

^:>\yt  Nn^NtJ'   ptJ«*7p  IJDNO^  JjJj  NniSJy  "l^fVp^  NJ^J^N  HW    Jjj  yt  \''\''V   n"lM3    JjJ  lo 

u_j]J!xi  ptJ«*7pi  pTy  fisUi  Joo  Jlii^  {j«npi  i^y  :i5l  Jlj^     ♦  \n^tJ'-iK»  ipy  dy  »Jt- 
icU*.j  wb^N  na  Ij^l  pTyJl  <^^)  icU*  ijl  Jb  dUi  Jjj  icU*  yiS^j^l 

nia  j^^Ji-oj    * JUJ'  ^;;-»  -s^tj  o^  (^'  "-^  'i^^  t^j  »>.*~wfij  jj  sJLs^  L>  jjsij  ja.j 
iJjjj    ♦  »jL«  »;SL^  cLkaJl  j-9.  \niaay  ivvpi  J^j    ♦  ^^Ul  ^^.  ^^  »la.l  jji  Na^"'S  15 
U  ^]  »iy$  jjk  K'nai  ^na  n  mosni  Jy^    ♦  juo  ^^  »^  .t. ; ...  '^rmn^  npy  013 

,jmJ    (jxJl*  ocsJ  ^l^-jj    JJ   sij^jjfc   N^DB'   ijtani   Jjjj      ♦  u-y:JiJ\   fj:^ji\    ^  20 
»J^-a*j   »JU  aic  Jl^  jjb  NK^aN  |»    n33^  Jj5j       ♦  t5JjJI  ^^  s^  j^^^CL-j   j^J 

sJyj     *  Jjj^"  »J  &J^  eU  j  ^^-^^3  \'\i^''  pc'aN  |»  N33^j  V3:i^  N^D5i>  !'i3»j  pins 
^jjj  eUi  iU*  ijj^Cj  J^  aji..^-,  I4JI  JU:  ^y  t-*Ai>  NTii^y  pa^n''  paiy  ny3K'i 


Om.P.         2  3-|,T  Bi  3nT  3nn''  X.         »  ySNID^N  B.         *  Prob.  «U-J1. 
Line  20.  I^l^ij  ^^. 


>*v  ♦  (JLoIo^^^jLo  '>^  * 


*  ^^^    ^*  (j-^-*aA>  ^UwuJl  cicvi  ^«  JU31  ^sjy  ^^»  (juulsxJU  c>-?.cys\3i  (^^o 

<(^)     cyt^b*    i253Xc  ^sSjiJl    »J>^^    (J^^^     «^    (jVO    \y>\3    L-5(>3U    IT 

JUjU    ^^1  ^;^j    »/----^    J~"    »^^    i*^-a.    ^^    {sL::S    LJ    s-Jii:  jilS    cjolj    wj^,Jl^ 
15  ^jl    ^;;-«>^  ^  »J^   \j  j^i  alUUJl   JL^   U-»  s^  LJ    .A^.fl.-Jb   sUb   (jjl)   ^^;— s.-J 

*  i_JLlaJj  (sUlJ!  J^  ^^\  ^1  ;J;JaJ  (j\  °^JlJ-aJl   ^j-*"  (^^  sJjij   ^j   »;v> ^iS  ^  »-JUaJ 
^    J    Jl5    ijya^\    »J^.    (S]LU1    »K    !-•    JJLui  ^^.kj;.)    jjp    ^jLi    (sUj    (^    »^^    sXiJj 

sob  JLjU  s-jU-li  ^^^s-ji^^^^  ^Jl  »-^  r^-^^^^  »-^'  "-^^  cj^  5/-^—^'  ^j  (♦bLjl  dJj^j 
jjJ  dDi  XJj  elLJl  i4a.  ^j-6  ^  U-ilj  sJU.  «>i*-^  ^;-»  s^^^— >aj  (^  iu^5L-  ^^^^  J 


'  phnT  P  X;  text  B.  ^  '^t,j^  |x  D  P  X  ;  text  B  K.  =>  n3»  codd. 

Line  3.  Wix^,.  6.  L-i^. .  9.  Cf.  Fleischer,  Kl.  Schr.  i.  294. 

10.  ^^^^kL-::-*.  llA^jSso.  I2^.\jls?.  23.  b^i-«. 


(^f  i>j^uo3  zCsiyA-aoJ!    A^«   <*^^'^-   *^**>^^  L-^cS^^  J^^  (J^  t_5*  (juulscO*      »*  J-ai 

«> 

^jjioLiJaLj  ey^lj^^jwsUxsso  <^X^\  lil  i.::>^  l_^<>31  p»\-ljl  yb  Ijjfc  (6 

«   t^lc>>C^    W)>yjuib«   .^AiUiJ 
Oe'b)^   <J^C5^^   V^IaA/Oj 

jbLAA.     L^^     JJ^^VJS     JtA*     JXJ]      *!4>C*  ^AaT    V^^^     0*'^'^^=*"    H^M     "^ 

'Uxu3i^^L»  ^^*.;5Cuo  j^Laci  ^»*  jlJl 
cywUo^*  °^^j^  t^lxJ^s)^*^  eA^Lc*  c:>;^  L^i>3i  i^CU!   yb  ey^l  n 

'  phnn>  B  K  p.  2  tj^p,  i}_  3  .^33  y^^y^  D  P  X;  text  B. 

Line  6.  1^.*JLxj.  13.  dLi-feJ^.  14.  (sLJjLJ. 


^  J-ai    nj^Ls  pK^np  pnijK  nn  ^^  H!J  U3  » jj-j«-»  *-»b  ^LLkb  »ll«,  wi  ^ys 
1  i^^U  j^,j,)  j^  L^jLs   ,^y^  ^1  ,_,ri.^ sJl  jjuk  «^  ijl  *^  JU  \ni5K  Dt^a  »J^j  eUl) 

jj  w  jo^  ,j«-J  nnn  n  ""o^n  ^irm  Jy^     ♦JLJi  J  «-jll5o1  t^jJl  Jpl  ^LlJI 
^UJI  Jyl  lil  u.  jO;j  UjIj  h^jj  ^^.  slXl.  jj  »j^  Jj^l  Jju  »,-i— ijj  j,UJl 

'  ♦   tJLi  oJlj   i::^^   iSii\ 

S^I^a::^    LJLfSS    JJCsxS   jui    (JwCJi   *i(3x*  j^  */^3   0***^=^   '^^J?^   ' 

2o  ♦  jCjUacl 


^  Prob.  ^.  2  xonp  "ipnjr  B  K.  »  ^rW  codd.  *  mriN  codd. 

•>  Prob.  jLj.J. 

Line  lo.  Uelj.         i6.  ^li.         i8.  ^li*. 


♦ 


(_j\^\l^     J.klUO      P-J-*^      ♦  tf 


sUy  s-i^l   Uli   Jj^l    AiW  ^^   us"  sLmJlj!    Jj    JLaL».j    j,L:-o  ^^Aaj    »jl   u-ij!c  Fj^ 

(^^Xa-   J^b    'UXa.    J5'^^lc>i    JUwO^sJ     \jA    Jlata^P    ^^y^  r        5 

y-oLs.  ^^\S  ^j  pLdl  y-j-^  (^  »JL-^j   «^-5^j  JW>lj   Jl   »^^*-«-<-?.   (J   wl  JlcI 
Jj^l  pLdU  j^U,  U  »il  ^4^   ^  T^\  Jib  -lX.  Jl   v±^j   JjI)   ^y  ^*^  10 
jjl   jj!ffj   ^LIl   11a   t^l,   UU    s^^;.^-^-   LJLtj    ^Uil   Jj;   c:?^^\«  J^.  iuti^  yi5 

(J^-y  JW^'-i   cAii*  >^Xx-o  (sUi  .XjOj   *4-aJu   j^\jJl  jjLCj   ^JJLC   jjL)    s^^^v oj   ^^ 

Jy5  A-»5CtL3  J  J5JP  lj]Jjj  ^^y:^i  ^Ijlo  j.t:^*JLi  ^j£.  j.a^  *U5C»  Ij^  L)  jjLc  15 
♦  ju»lc)J  pUJi  oAiiJ  &A»  evivao.c)i)!  tf^^^i  -*^^  lSo^\  c5^bJ^ 

e>^    Lit>^^    ^_yoLu  ^^    Xvo    ^3tvCM»  ^AC  J!w    (J^    tsCvi    Q>jyaO.J-i)!  30 
^  ytQ  HNINI  all  except  C.        *  yDD>  C  D  P.        »  Ijyjjj,  g  .  l^^y^  ^  t  Q^^^Ulp 

codd.        ^  i^anyo  B.        «  riyai  d.         ^  j^jj^,^  ,i,j,  ^odd.        «  J^  . . .  t-KrAt 

the  codd.  vary,  as  also  between  }Nn,  )N3S  |''n\  »  After  Ij^j  add.  .T^^JNl  P. 

^°  dDK2  codd.         "^^obliterated  in  K  Q;  om.  B. 

Line  i.  L«Ll»,  s—Oj.  7.  ^JJiJ.^t-^l.  etc.  g.  \^\j>.  14.  bb  b.b,. 


r-J^    (^>*u-w    ^J\ji}\     tf;s):s)r  ^»y*    (J.4£.    ^\    i:^^\jA)\j    eyb^^!    rr 
— 1»  ^ 

4^Xo     sSX^     2ULws)    ^^yb    j^  jUAjbj^^*     zU^-IaX  y^S  ^Jb     ^  S^\->S  n- 

r  .TOP  'nn  n^^^JD    inD^D    ^  ....U    JyT  iixplj    ^L^i)|    ^^L:i.l    ^    jXll    Ji£    »JlkL-j 
j^  C5*"*^J   V"^  ^-^  (•'-^   iJ^  '^W'    mW-x'j    *;j-*l5   <-^-»^-!^    ^J    jJ^   ^  iJuli    is^S^  kJ 

vj^  jjIjU-."  eylijl  ^  »-Jlc  ^jli  U  «_i!li^.  »jL...^j  ww>.  iL.!!L-  ^i»3\nn  pjni 
*  NnyyiD  .  .  NnnnK>3Di  codd.         ^  j^-,-i2i^  B  c.  ^  Nnni  C  P QX;  nm  B. 

*  Om.  C  P  Q  X;  ins.  B  K.  ^  I^B'i'Nl  C  P  QX ;  text  B  K.  «  niji)  C. 

'  ni.T^N  B  K.  8  nsn  D  X;  text  B  etc.  »  Om.  C  D  P  X;  ins.  B  etc. 

'°  VS*n  B ;  ^psn^N  cett.        "  -"^ND  C ;  Jj^ND  B ;  ijND  K  X  etc.        "  nnSJNyO  P  Q  X ; 
nnS3y»  C ;  nmWNyO  B  K.     Probably  we  should  transpose,  reading  uJ^iLsr^  J!.^  Ui 

lu-^j  s-—-^  1*^  ^^Nnn  pyni  ^_5:jt-j  vj^H  »jLil>w  cyls^l  ^  n-Jl*  ^jlS^U 

Line  lo.  ^ll^j  (J^.  •  I3-  W'^j  ^-^j-  14.  IjoIa.  18.  ULl*. 

F  2 


♦  jjlkJL»JJ    (^1^      &Jl*     J'^'^J     it"* '"  ^     ^.W.Pl     (<^     (^T«)     ^jlS     »-JLc     (J-«J»     r)-* 

^^  j»!xaj  U-c  i^UJI  J— J  jjj    *  ^Xaj'^  ^4i.j^  1^  ^Ij  sil^j  npvn  JUi  isUi 

<Jj^-  u^   iJ?;^^   IjJukLi.   JJ   Lo    jj   LijAi».jt    yy^jlxj    J-s:*"     ^jJ^-j-*^   JJ^jj^-j    S>\   Joo. 
^^    t-->jy-o-i.    S-i-t    ^J^-    (^    <J^^^-    OwJjJl    (_^    sJlxi    J\JxJl  ^^l  Urc-^.    ^^    elUi    J-i-0 

jL».>.\    ^^     ^J\S     L»j     *-i-ajl     »-;^     ^^     StJi    Le    ^=9     iiJLlll     aJLrJI    kzA  >>       ♦  lU-AJ    ^Lc 

^15CaJ1    oIjlUU   (•--o^i^  OyuUl   (J^  Ji   e*Ji^  ^^^1  ^^UXsx^  n 

♦y;^.  ^^w  (^^i  J^e5» 

^\  ^^^..ju.  ^^1  ^_yIU  j^.   jJUl  "JaI  JS"^2  Jl^L:Lir>  °i^^^ijj),'' 

.  ♦  nun  p^SnD  ni  U^l^  N^om  n^dk  UJjl  jLliiJl  \4-.i  -^j 


»  tiio^«  add.  c.        =*  nn^NfjjNi  codd.        2  S3  codd.  (B  c  K  p  Q  X).       "  nbn 

added  in  most  MSS.  after  JjJb  (not  C).      ^  D"'^N  C  j  D^i?  most  MSS.       «  QHI^  1^1  C  P. 

^  nnnxB'  B.       «  n^i?N  ^JxysN  n^xjy  B  c  Q ;  'n  ijNyaN  'n  Txjy  x ;  cm.  bav^a  P. 

«   Prob.  j^U.  ^0  ^aiwSI  C  p.  "  Prob.  i^^\s^VxA.  ^'^  bnH  b  C; 

ija  ^nx  cett.       ^3  nyi  c. 


• — ^ —    eJLi.  ^j  l^-sjyi.  dJi  x:t'i  °]^Iju  l^y».r  ^  JUj  ^jy^^  vL)  ^^  t^j^ai      ♦  s^b 

5  ^jt,^    *A;::-«J    (•^J.W^   oils    Jj    U^   Vj^    (^    (*^J/*    *^-^J      «^U11    *l3l    ^^ 
JiiU   jnllii   j_j,Li    Uf-i    ^|Ji    j^X?.}]/-'  ^S    »J^    |*4J.W>    J^  cJJ-^    ^'M^lr' 

,j,*Jj  *4j^jl^  ^^  ilj  ^4J-«  "U-J  (J  ^^^  A-^l^^  ijl  t-jjlc  *J  ♦  L^.:-*  L^ 
^4JL^j  jbJl  ^^  ]>*-^  J>«*  ^  »-i^  AJ  jiUll  (j?,LJl  JLol  jj-»  v-^-<i-?**  el^^ 
JxU  jjLs:*-'   j,4jLJ   ^^J  jUll   j^.  ^1-il   Jj^    (Jj   U^  j->^  >*   j_»JlkL> 

T.l'7p''bnn  ^;^^JbUJl  tC^-^^  J^  ^j^j  ♦'''1^^  ^^^^"^^  nisi'Bi  HtTiy^  jJ^^^ii^^  ^jj  ^lj^^« 
i5^^U::Jr^.  ^;Uj  ^  ^^JojJl  j^'  lift  g  jJJl^^U'o    ♦  dJi  o3J^-3  ^j>?*^^  ^>M 

in  .n  mo®  ynVN  yiij  l^il  ^j^  D''0l3"inJl  ^^ufclx.  eUJJ  ^Jj  ^^-^  ,y  iwj^.s**  ^_^1  US 
jjL£j  (jJlil  Jji^.  1^1  luU--'^  ^L-j  ^L:iir»  dJi  XftLi  U  >x;.w»  ♦  Kin  D^n^K 
jci  ^  Jji  ^iTieU  juL.j  133  nnyi  ib'^o  nma'  n  pnn^N  nnn  JlJj  jJU^  JL-  dJ i 

2o  i;;-*   ^j   »Jl«Jl   ^J^   dJi  eJ^  »J^^^  jXs^   dMl   *Ji*jo    ^"   sJLllj  *4jo«  JSLm  laJMl 
Uj   l^-aii:^  *4Jl   ^jyi.   ^Tvh^   iv^nnHH   H   MnDy!?  a>TBn  Jy^     ♦  »^  JUjI 

J     ♦  »^  UJ"^^-?^  ^  LS^  "^'^  J^j^-^  (.4^U^1    l^JL  j_j:jo    pnjD^    Nh  pn^B' 


^  W-I3N  i^xyn  c.  2  onnnriDi'  c  p  x ;  text  B.  ^  cn^bn  most  Mss. 

^  Om.  c      '^  Nn^a  B;  n^a  CQX;  *a  P.      «  n^na^s  mv^N  codd,      '  riMNiN  Q; 
n^K^N  X ;  n>^i<nt<  C ;  nn'-sn  B  P.      «  nay  C  Q.      »  n^wy^N  P  Q.      '°  inhdnq  b. 

"  'n3D>  C ;  1-ISD"»  most  MSS.  "  DHIliT  B ;  DHmn^  |N3  P  Q  X  ;  D.Tnnn^  C. 

Line  9.  l.iLxJ.  12.  L-*^.-^.  20.  j^JL-..  23.1^X00. 


Jj     l^jt-oirJj     l^JU»y-J     j,4JUs     ^^     i**-.     Jls.!^     »-:^^     U^^    <-JIjl-»1    t-Aii    r.  Jj-«li 

l»4.JUfi  l^il  ^;^5Cj  nn^tjnnijj    ♦  *a;j1  pnnb^aj    ♦  ^  6-i'Uj>.  pn>5j>''t2S    ♦  dill 

JU  «^U1    ^^yl''   ^^i)    ^{i^j^[,,   y^/      ♦  JCJI    Jj    ^^    ^^IS    i:;^    e:,\j^   y  5 

>»-*-^j  U^  ffr^J  -^-^  e*.x-flJ;l  ^L4^  ^^1  <^j.^.  dUij  j,!iii9  ^Ul  ^j^  ^j  ijl  lo 

J^jjiUjj    Ixfe  ^^  JjiJJ     ♦^Ul  ^y  ^^U.  i^JL"  j^Ul^  jUy   uy^l^'** 
u^  »T)  L.  \j;j  Jj  i^^j^U.  jut^  l^li  ^^^  ^jl  UU  »JL.jjJ  jj'j  U  JlSj  Dpi  nin 

^^^Lj  j^  y»^  L.  ^Ij  8J\  j,4iJUj  'IJI  1^33  N^n  JUi     ♦  dMl  Ij^^aJL)   Jj  ijLiiJl 
eU  :i)j     ♦  i5Cj:Ul   «-jJLj  ^yi  ^^"  u*^'  **l;^  >^   Ul  U  JUi  ^^  l^Ui 


*  1»T|  C ;  Itsns  cett.  2  pj^^^ljj^  c^  "  jV  C  j  '•^jy  cett.  *  The  MSS.  in 

this  chapter  have  1''Cn  for  1D"I  passim.  "*    DPllp^n  eodd.  (B  C  K  P  Q  X),  scr.  ^^1. 

«  yim^^  Q  5  lynnn-"^  B  C  K  X ;  nym^i'  P.  '  After_^^l,  Cmc  ins.  by  some  MSS. 

8  «»n  C  KQX;  ion  P;  HNOn  B.        "  >n^N  eodd.  "  "IW  B  K.         "  pnNO  C. 

^2  msi?  eodd.         "  \'\2>b  G. 

Line5.  JU.  7.  i^jIUJI.  8.  JU.  9.  i^UVl,  ilUj.  ii.U^lj. 

12.  li,^*.*.         13.  ^^^iU.  ^^j^L..         18.  ^^J^lj. 


r  J-aJ      (j-*^  t/    '-r'^r^  J^J    *-^^  L-*-«^->   (J    dJi    ^j  »-l«....A  (jaaJJ  f/*jJ    eU J   v_i-iXjl 

""*"       p3^n>N  jn  |y3  "sJ^j     ♦  (^^jr**  r*^  u*-^  ^  ^  jj^.  uj^^^^^-  u'  ^^aU.) 

L»  JjtAj  ^Jl  mjLc  fc_^^j  eUJJLi  s^i^o  Jj  ^JuJl  J-^-s-.  jJlc  ^  ^^ju  »_>1^  ji;j  Jl» 

lo  ,_531  viA^f-ojl  ool  ^^Ij  »,-wLi  ^  »y>.j  jJlc  »j  LlJic  JJ^j  (jjjl  jUl  (jyl  ^^  U-o^ 
,j«uJ   N7  }m  »Jj5j     «  dJi  ^Jlc   .iU   LojI  _^  .LJl  ^yi\  j^  ^1  »-»j  ^Jic  LdiS 

jjuotj     (j*-Jj        *  1«^     ^     »J^     ^^^■'-ir^    \^     ^^^.     ^^r^.     U*^     *^^     ^-^^-S^r*^*    (J     uS 
Jj  Lju    ^^jJl   j^_^l*Jl  ij^rv^.  ^^    SjJlJ   JjiJl    iJuSij      *  j_ftJll-o    L»  ^J  1^1   X Ju-oo 

20^1^  ^,<^-B'l  uyj^  i_y^  ^yrji  ij^  <-^Ij  (*^-^  uj-^^?***^  ^  lt*  *-i>^"  (j^  *^^ 
^j\  Ju:  Jj^  Ni>  |m  fr^y^^^    ♦  cU-Jl  8-^  (^jJl  J^  »--Ju  ^/t  JUJ'-i  eHJji^ 


1  P  after  ^^i»  ins.  Nins.         '^  n"in3  C.         =>  IT"!""  C.        *  D^J  C  ;  n!?  most  MSS. 

»  2Nn^y  c.        « iN^n  c.        "^  p3^s  codd.         8  nuyj  c.        »  n^i  C;  ch  cett. 

"  nJD  D!?y^  DHJD  most  MSS. ;  QHiD  D^^  CnJD  C.  "  UTW  C  "     HJIpin^  C 

"  DH^Ip  |0^  B  (om.  ijl  Jlc  Jjj)  cett. 

o 

Line  3.  Vj-jutii.  5.  Ij.a:lxj.  8.  I^Ip.  10.  oLejl.  13.  Lje^. 

20.  IjJj:***^  etc.  22.  loJotJ  etc. 


j»4Jl  ^j\  U  XLS.  lj*U  ^\  ^-ijjjj     ♦  u>*^y^.  u^  J^  W^  Ir^^ij^^^  ^y.1     r  J-4i 
oj^I  ^_^  Jls**^  J  ,jL*jl  {J\.  «jlj   *i-aU   j.j».Lj  »4a.j   ^Jlc  x».1j  J>  ^ij  ^y*"^' 

i—ftJl*   jjl   j_l»   ^^^^li   ^^1    \jL>   Jl5    <jl   ^JLc   J  Jo   IjtAj        ♦jUJl   ^yJl  jy''  j^JLj 

ij^l    *!^   ^^^    j^^^    "^^^    ^^^^^    (*-•-*'    ^    ^-^^    ^^  j"^^  cJ-*  t-H    U^   ui''^^ 
1^5^   ^1   ij-LJl    ^JJl    ^y   (jj^    ijl    U!,  ^^   Xs>\   dJi    J^^LJJ   v-^j    \j\)y'^ 

^J\    JoO   IJili       ♦  kii    ^i'&Ug     (%4-J-*    ^y     u^^    ^    (%^-H-H"    >-t-^    |?>^-i^_5    *ft-^P 
i^yS^  ^iyjfj^    ^\X»     sJJLj:    ^JO    w^    loJ?    Jii,!    ^Jl5^    sJ^    ^l^AJ  .ijJE*^'   s-JU    ^Li 

l^Lts^  ^,\  ^jA  (^jJl  (sUii  ijUU  j»A  |»4J  1^;^  ^^„jJl  *!)i^j    ♦  pnin^Ji  nmoi  20 


1  •'lijN  codd.  2  ,1,^  p_  »  D^  P;  N^J  cett.  "  Dnmm  P  X  (ex  corr.); 

text  B.  ^  yp^  PXj  DnI'dI'N  B  K;  r^^'^^  P  Q  X;  NIDN1  K  PX;  \XO'm  B  Q; 

something  apparently  is  lost.  * 

Line  I.  l^Jta^J.       2.  Jj.      5.  ^^jLiXI.      6.  l^iiiJ.       7.  \j.j».lai.      8.  JJb,  U-Jic. 
10.  ljyia-^>.         17-  ^j^-  19-  ^-  20.  ^^jJI.  23.  1^. 


rj-^     ^vAa^  ^4>^   CJc>^^  (^b)^    €>^  (Jili^  j^UXsO    oj.A,==vo  rA 
'^^-^^^  jUJ^   ZmIc  Li53^  cJc>^l    ^O-fy^  ^==Vij   jXU  Jw^)   Lii>Ji  yCi^yf^j 

JMJlcV      (<♦      ^*^<>^^%      ^XMA^      ^^i>***'      ^^^'      •^^^      cV^-^iV^"     l"*^ 

t5iUl  t5^Uj  j,J-J\   11*  J*i  (JUll  ^;;^'   U  »i\   dJi  ^y  JjJLLi  ^\  ll*  J^ 

^Islj     ♦  »-iy:j  J^*  [^J»  ^  rrna  Jy^  »^-^j  ^^Uj,1^j     ♦  v^'^ 
pl^i  ^^^^ji«,  »xUj,\  Jju*j     ♦  \4-3  1^.  u-^^  cr*  r'^  Cr""  ^^  ""'^'^  **^ 

20  ^y  yLt*  Uii  (JU\  ^jju,  jT^^  u-^i  vWj  ^i**^.  ,^*  ^j"^   i^*^  ^b  u-^^ 

^^v,..^.  ^  «uii>  ^^JOi  'V  ly^  ^^j  ^'  cj^^  r*-«^"  ^j  H^^  't^^j" 

1  Verse  30  om.  B.  *  NHma  B  Kj  NTO^HB  P  X.  »  Om.  P.         *  nhi  X; 

text  B  etc.         "^  Prob.  \^ji^. 

Line2.  ^^_jjl.  3.  IjJ.^.,  ljXs--i.  6.  IkU.  18.  UU,  i^yiJ,  Ul^i. 

19.  »j^,  IjJ-?--^.,  &.vJb.  21.  V  if^-  22.  (j^J^l- 


j»»4-lA:sUa.^      j»^^sj^j^>      jyixS     cJ^J^^      '^'3j^     O-^^^^fi-^     M  rj-a* 

(J^  b^  j*^<>6^  ^^^J*M  ^^c3^  (*4Xi>^  c3W^^  '^biUU  '''" 

(JiU^    Oj'/s.aevo     'i^Aj^    ^\.9j    J^AJ    ^^1   ^^UXs\3    c>X;Ua-   rf 
OAXtCo    jU3i    (^j     ia^    ^)!     U^^     cJ^'^v     2^b)^>    O^fs^i    3^Ut)vO 

i^^^^i  ^l*)i    Tf^sJ^Sp  (^4>^i    V(M>^    A-SU^j-iS^  ^Ak-0  ^^i>Ai  (JiU*   15 

'^'3j'3   o^^  '^^  'Uc>3^  JUjJ!^   'Ix'^^  e>6*^^?^^   •'V 

*  ji^Ai  eytjA*^^  U^b  5.s\y^4  <-:y/A*>  b?  j»^^s)^\^jo^» 


^  Dn3KtD''a3  many  MSS.      2  QnriND^^m  codd.       '  nnpHD  codd.      *  psn^O  B  P  X  j 
pnE)3D  D  K.     5  Om.  B  D  K.      «  Om.  B  K  j  add  in  marg.  D.     ''  n^KT  P  X ;  text  B  etc. 

Line  2.  l^j.  3.  )LaJ.         4.  ^^.JJl.  16,  17.  ^^^U  etc.  18.  ^^.U1. 


5  (_5»    uj(J'S}um:>   ^    e/^  t/|^  °0^>1    C-5c>Ji^    j^Axa)J    UcVsxxuS^    Laiis 

(^,.3EV>     C.>uaJ     t^lUiJ     {jAS\3»     yXiO-fy^S.^      ^*^»i^M     ^^t>-«^      W-?W^     '  "^ 

♦  (^oC>W^  ^y»  lc>j^  (^jXc  (_;>A:i.b;3Ev/o 
iO(^  Uasx;oJ  X»<^^  o^.cv?^  o=5a>   c54>J^  Ua^I   0*0.1   ij^i"^  IV 

15  ^^^jXa-  "JWIajo.^  tVi^j*-^  V;/y*b^i  ci^-J*-***^   <J»^^  Oj-JS^^^  y^cyfi^J  ^•*>'*-fi^ 


»  Om.  PXj  text  B.        «  |N3  B.        ^  N^J  codd.        *  H^D^N  X;  om.  P;  text  B. 

Line  2.  v^.       5.  ^J^Xs'^^  (J>*^'        ^'  *^*  ^-^-       '^O.  sjJolc.        12.  Uac^, 
L»j\.«,»i.  14.  Ij^.  15.  See  Index,  s.vv.  Jta.lj,  (e^*. 

E  2 


l^j^j  e>^v^lc)-w»5'  cJ^^^   pcM3   oiJi   (^   \i>A   enva.  ^^  A 
♦  c)-?by  (ji-AC  ,^1  l^^j  *^!^^As.Uxs^J  ^;/ JiiU.  !yUi.l  ^ 

<Z>ya   ^4aiO  (^^31   ^^Lui!   Jj  ^\  ]^1    eiAsu^  ^^^    o^l   U-^l    I  .         lO 

^tJl    i^j^    Ix^j    ^\    f^^cyi.    f>s=uu^    ^ib     ^    L^4>31     e>^*   II 
(^    J^U   '»-b.c>^   'sJUc  (^^   1^^  CJc>3^    twj>   cJ^    0^.i   •>•        15 
LijJi  c^t>3!  (^.i^  c:>?.o-?^  ^r^  t^b^b)   (••4^^***>^  (^  «^^  W^J 
^MKfi/9    ^jo^    »-?W-ti^    cJ^    '^^^    OJ-**^  ^^^jwsUXacu    <>aAa-:^   \r 

♦  i^m  p,ic>j»  U'i'^v^  cJW-/^^  «^b^j^  c>^^<v^*  y»^<>-6^^  20 


*  P  only;  om.  cett.       2  ^^y^  p       3  p  ojj|y.  pg^^  ^j^p^j^      <  p  ^^1^.  ^^^^  ^^^ 
Line  i.  Ai.         5.  ^^j^lj.         7.  ililj^^         9.  ^JJ^. 


«•?  <^U  »jUi,  3Lo,  ^  uj jAI  *1sj     «  3  JLjIjJ  ^_5^iJ  ^^1^  el^JuJJ  *-.^lj  ^-a-|>J  »J^*-«^ 

-    ♦*    -  ♦  eUi    JaO    ^^    »;lXt-.  \X 

♦  viJLiJl  J-ajJl  ^  ^'^\  ^  *J\^\  J-oAJl  j^\  UaU  J\ 
5  ijsaj^^  s\^o   f  y^    J^cUs^!   UA4>  UXw3   Jw*i:   <£^^  ^^asUXso  i  r 

♦  (J^W  »^.cM'  (^  ij*^  »**^  c_5**  li^\j\  A^<3^^  ciyw^ 

^XiCi^\  ^\o-s^  ^y^J   ^y*^i^  *^^^  jj>a\xXsaJi  ^\   L-5  jJ!  j»-l«a3!   (>»iic)J 
10  ♦  [^UX:sU  pli!  (^c>Jl 

o\.a=XAtf)L    ^Uji3L     'Uv.*^M*     'l/o^l    (^vAJU.Xsx/0     lysir   c>XiAA.    r" 

*.ajoJ1  ptW"  e>A^lj.  <^^\^  ^j»eUxs=u  ^Ul  c5<>31  (•.AjoJI  (^\o  ^^\ 

»5  (»^b^^    OyijiJI     l^^j    V;/Joli'    jJJ     w^iJ^-?     L^oU?.    (^oU^  >« 

♦  Xm^wsUxsxi  pU!  Lia31  (_^c>3^  (^^  l^j-==uu3^ 


»  After  A»l  B  X  add  'O'V.  *  Sicj  cp.  M.koo.  '  JHIN  K  Q;  yxm  cett. 

*  nypn  nyn  >D  B  K  ;  nnn  all.  **  Verse  3  om.  Q  X ;  supplied  in  the  marg.  of  P ;  it 

had  been  omitted  (except  the  last  clause)  in  the  archetype  of  Hebr.j  the  corrector  of 
P  translated  it  afresh  with  nONpN  'D^N  '2  "•"l^N.  *  Dip  codd.         '  jl^^Np  K  P  Q ; 

p^^Np  cett. 

Line  3.  ^^  redundant,  5.  \s\ji,  9.  ^^y  rS-  ^b^- 

[11.3.]  E 


Jj  (^JJl  ^  JjLi  ^  ^j  i:y^L!-^  cr**  i*^'  ^ J^  U**^  U^  4]r»i  "■^K'Q  p^HDl  NO^Jn      r  J^ 
^\jL»  yi,  y^,\i-'^ij^^iS  J  (j—Jj  »^^j  »--J  /^^j  »^^  ij^^  l»^^  jjL«Jill  ^SJi  ^^  ijy^^ 

-^^  ^jls  c^jJl  Xxjt  ^j!  ^*j  mtj'a  jDNnDi  Jy^     ♦  »Lj1  %'\ji\  JUj  JJl  j.-a5    ""^ 
♦  t^lnl  00  ^_y»  cJW*'<^^  %*^-  <>^s^5  '^^**><i^  p-'jo^ 


1  p^B>  codd.  2  3-)p,  codd.  »  ^J^^Jii^N  P.         *  N13  B.  »  Prob.  ^Li. 

Line  I3AL^      19,  L*--,  liUaL-.       20.  L»«J^.       22.  J  redundant.       23.  I^i-o. 


»=>«  j^U  ^^  ^\^|  ^^  J^^^yi^j  Ji"cvi  4>>^  b!^^  oj-*^  '^^  ^bP 

^  j-^^    v:>jikJb^  (J^^i    c:>^   L/^    cy^-lai    u5c>Ji    vi*>y2>-  o^  ^o 
5  v;^5t^)^  oj-^t^J^  2^3^  (J>^|^  CjuuUeuJVj  j-?.c)^i  e>.»Oj  Liobl? 

^il  J,^  ^j-.  >Lkjijl  ^/^*^-  J-oir"^  eJUU  JiUj   c^jL,a-o  *jL-flj  eUU-.  ^^iH  Jlo 
♦  J^U-mJj  j,j jl  ijyjj  j^l  jjkj  j»i-Jl  J*^  oIj  Uil  j.Ldi  ^  J^j     *  p  Jjl^ 

(sUU-o    \JL^h}\    \jIl>    L_iLjj   *jilj    J^U— J    JjJ    I4JI    «_i^     ♦  LljI    j»4JL»    j^^ 

*;^  ^^.  j/Jl  iSj^\^     ♦  Nmaijo  pi^N  b  Piom  pnn  iJj^pft....«yj  |»a  jL«lai\l 

Jo»j^  »j^  j^l  ^^  (•■*r<^^  J/^J  vj/J^   ^  p6>r.°>   (^j^'  ^  ^   i^lj  c^^W^ 

N.iHD'N  »Jy^*A^  1)5^  fy  bin^'  mNsn  ps  D^ot:'»  h^^bti  Jyi^J-UJl  ^^  ^,  Jjj\ 
v.iDv  'D  sJjiS^  JjjJl  Jjjj  J-oJ,-^  J^  ^jjJjiasjX\  J  J*AJ  dJoSj  nn^  \^[>  Dnn 

^^L*.*!   »jlj    Ca-^   ilj^    I4JI   Uj^   »Jua.lj    J^'  ili   U^j^    JuLC    JW^I^   dJj^    Jj  uIj 

kJ>L,  J*.j  j£   ail  u^elli   lyi^.  jj  Uii  ^  ^  v>^'  <^  W^^  ^>l'j4  5)  ^jl 

JjjJl   sjufc    ij^UaJ  ^^   »-JLjo   U   isl'^  j^\    jj-la.   LojI   dJi   ^_5»j    *4J   LsU-oj  *4JU: 


n^x^i 


^  ^^JVN  P  Q  X ;  text  B.  2  y2^3  pQ^^j  s  tj^t,^  ^q^^^  *  Q^p,  ^q  j^ 

}b'»  codd.       «  rry^N  b. 

Line  i.ixJu-*  etc.  5.  ^L>l->.  il.  W**-  I5«  u^^'*  ®**^*  •'V-  i**-!  Jp* 


22.  LW-ifcL*.. 


UiLii.!  JU:  uJi»U  ,j*J  N^ta  pjonn  mvD  N^ns  Nnnn  >!)  J^j     *  ^13=*^'  Jjl.    r  j^ 
Ijufe  Uj|^  sjon  n3Di  N^PB  nJD  Jls  Uitj  myo  kAb  l^Jic  JIijlj  J  i\  ^U^l  »''"  (J.>-^ 
jjij  Nrt3  p)Dn3  iiyo  N^jps  nnn  n  ij^p  b  U^  J^l  cl-*^yJ'  ^^"^^^  J^  ^/-    ""*" 

^\j    ra'bsi  13^D    Jjii^  dJdl  ^J  \j^^\  ^\    US^  »il  uJ^ii    v^jJlj   j»j^^  Is^bi*! 
♦  j»iLjil\     j^i     j_^    aL».jiJ     (jia^    cJ^     (jJ^La_Jl     SyXi     ^.     JuoLajJI     ^^J     ^JlC    iej.jij 

jU^iji    elJJ^    t5;LajJl   ^^.j    (^  ^j^jiwo^  jji    Uj*   lA)^!}    ci>\jU-Jl   j^JU*.    »ji  lo 
dJi  ^^jj      ♦  nn  by  niT  ppm  jinf'  n^  Jls  dJlU    «  U^*^  J_^.  i^^ ^J\^\^ 

j^^zJl    L-^j,     Jl      *  J^^    x^    JJjJJ    laix^-    :^    VS  ^J^.    nI^PS    n3    NH    t^^. 
^Ji\y^  U^*lil    LftJU    aJ^'^I    ji.    Jj     j^^b,i    Ooji.    ^j    l!!L'3\    jLs:^   J    iliUj^l 

JjJl  J  ^-^  JJ  UjXI  m1/^  ^y4^  e;-»  ^^-e  Jjti  Ljr^o  JjOJ  Jii  L^l  Ulj 

aJLoJI     ..^^aJ  ^i    jj\    XxJj    is.Xa.lj   Ajtka    I4J1S    JjtJft-j     Lft-^Jkl jw»    Lijl  ''^    Okilxjhl    ^^lJ 


'  nhx^NI  codd.       2   *^^_^jJJ^:jo^  om.  X;  text  B  P  Q.       MCJ*^  B;   Aj^  ^^, 
om.  B  J  text  P  Q.  *  NDD  P  Q  X  ;  text  B.  ^  inn^li  B  X ;  text  P  Q. 

'  NHiyni  B.        '  mi  B.        «  niNinn  codd,         »  nb  codd.         ^^  kdd  b  x  ; 

text  P.       "  |P^N1  INin^NI  P  only;   pi^NI  cett.;  prob.  ^iTN^Nl,  i.e.  *li.>"^lj.        "  Om. 
P  X ;  ins.  B. 

Line  i.  UIjIc.  3.  U-4-^.  16.  J^,  La-Uj. 


r  J^     nriN    ^\J\    jsUi\   ^   JJ^  jj;      ♦m^I    dUu    J-J    ^1^1    dOii    ^^LJ!  Jjl^ 

5  ^U.     ».>JLj    *JLaJl     jjl     »-^^     Jj      AJ\^1    £,-t^j    Ij-f^j     SJoLolj    j»^l    j^.    ^^^Jf;;*    »-*-2J 
■^..layJi     (^^-^-^     *^^     l*^!?     "^^1)     *-A^_)     »-*^^J     "^Ij^I^     "-fJ'-^J     A  *  rfi ; :  ^     LoLL>     j»i\ 

Lx^^^jj.  ^l^^j  xijil  ^j^  li^^  *4J<  viA-H>»  cr*  NnynvNi  N^^n  «J^.  ^.^^1; 

Ju4iLi-«     yA    Ui      ^-5^    *j^l     dJUj     «-.J;jJl     CsU-»      (.J      i^^-^i—     *-J^.    »tJ/*^'    J-^     C*5jLe 

pj^  diill  ijlT  (jjJ!  t^l  dtU  oJj  ^^  ^  nr^D  laijo  Jjij     ♦  (,^^1  u^-M^ 

J»1   JLs    taJJJJLJ    dJiXI  ^   Lj^\    si^LiJ**  Uil^    v,^i    elU    «-•   ^^^  ^j^l   diJu 
i5i^U-»  l>!ibj>l«  jj^  ,j--J  w^D  eionn  anyo  Jy^     *  nn  nih^j  n^pq  n  Nnnv: 

>uU:i)l  ^  JjSj      «  UjI  ^U^l   ^  J^l   dlji^      ♦  k^l   JjJaJ   dlij      ♦jlSL* 
^^l  j^  -^  8jl5C)  ^j^l  ^^  »,»,.!  jojJi  \jufc  J\  I i ,:. >  c]Dn  pnjDi  i'na  jinjo 

^^A^l  lift  ^^^  »jc..o^  ^y  esUj  rr^  ^  ls^  u^Ju*"  jjO  U^l  Jjl  w  jy  ^jjXj  ,j1 

iLaill    x^\^)i\   Jjl   ij^o    ^jl  u:^-  j..^i'\\  lift   jLcj    L-8 . « .p    ijj5o    U^l'o^lj 

(sUU  (Jl  »j   j-^  i;^^  ijl  Ulj     ♦  jls:*  ^^   '■V*'!)   **^'*^  (  cr* )  J^^  ^  ■*-»->. " 


1  ••^Nn  P ;  om,  cett.         ^  nni'Nn^W  ri^JSn^N  codd.         '  yaVxi'N  codd.         *  ^a-i 
B  P  (K  X?).         «  ni31NB>  codd.         «  D^133N  B.         '  n«an  codd.         »  nW  P  Q  X ; 

D^j^f  B  K.  »  mn  ^a  n^ipa  njjvio  --b  B  K  x ;  text  p.  "  moN  codd. 

"  DC'D  y»  p. 

Line  2.  ^j»^lj»j.  9.  ajl-i.  19.  ^j^.  21.  LLio.  22.  Ix^jt^. 


— >» 

^^  U  Jlc  snynvNi  N^^ai  ^.1.>ax11  ^y  -^j  sjon  pjoi  irs  pjn  \ni^a"»  ju» 
»*W.ilj  Napn  Lolj  s/C-uc  »^i5li  won  Ul  Nspm  njdh  Nnis^Di  JjJj    ♦  sIjlju.  5 
y^\  v_ijki  }nn  n  ij33l  JU»^     ♦  J   i^Ul  icli.j   ^joJlj  JUl   »;j:5dii  N-ipM   Llj 

^y   *4**   lOjj  ,_5!i   J-flj   &J1  u"'-^^    lA*-*.   J'^j  (*^.   ^j    '•^^  (•^^  ''-^   ^  J*^. 

j^j  t;-!^!^,.*-.-^-   Ijjk^  j4^   ..^JJl  j^jpi   o^*  (*^b  's'J^  ^^'  Jj'  ^^Ij 

iJjjJl  ii-o  ^y  Uf/  sW)  Jj  dJi  ^y-^  Jj  ^^^-Jl3lju»Xll  ^^^^-*i  »^'-iM^  i-fcb-i*  . nM> 
^^.  J^  Ny-IN  bn  D^tJTl  n  JIjj  ♦  dJiJl  ^^  ^^jil  l4il  Jyj  ^^ft::5f  «^ «  ilJLlJl ' 
^,j\  dLU  ^UJlj  jJUJI  ^\^  ^iJii  (sJLL.  ^Ul  dmi  ^':i  ^UJl  (sUil  ^^^  ^LiJl  dULil 

iliJlj  c-*AJJl  JJjJi  Jjj/°  US^^^Sl-oJl  Jjo^"  dUdl  11a  J^^  N!?ns3  NS"'pn 
^^^JLJL-,  us  iuL«3  ^y  I^IS  <jjJ\  dJUil  j-s:*-  sjl  jjkj  N^ja  ijtrm  pino  JU  ♦  u-^j 
J.XJJ.J     *  1,^1  dU  j^  ^j!  J^  ^^1  dJu  jA  Ijukj  Nina  ipn  pn^n  j  dJi 

J^j  ^Ul    dLUl  iU^illj   j^lj  ^yhJI  dLUl  i^^l;JJIj  ^J-Jlj  Jpl    dUl  u-l/Jl 


^  DNatDijN  codd.         =  p  Q^iy,  gg^.^.  ^j^  3  -^^jj^jj^^  or  n''ND^N"|  codd.        *  TUN  B. 

»  K  only;  IHI  cett.                 «  Prob.  J^lST  ^  iTiNfl^N  codd.                 «  nJN!?  codd. 
"   NSiriD^DI  codd.         '"  pin  codd. 

Line  14.  iXl-..  22.  ool^^l. 


j^U  jy  ^^^jj^  \^  \^^^  N^  ^^Uo  jUo)i   c>^^  ^_^i  ^==vsv3|^ 

♦  XUl  JcX»  (Jj-i^  ^/iS*^"^  p^l  ^<>A  '"'' 

5  ^^  dJ  »^IiJ  liyfcj  JU;  j^*  (sUli  x^M  jj»j  eUii  »^  L.  J^  ^Ldl  d  ^ 
*^\jlJ\  »^U-  Wy<.-^-  J\  y^.  (J  us" ills-  ^  i^,,^  J\  uA-J  ^  -^'^-^  JS 

c:>ja^   ^Ikcl  'UuJ\   v^s^^   i^d^\   ^y^U   c^^  ^1   W?3   o^^  rv 
^ILj  3JI  aLiUvib.  t>«UJl   ^jyS\^  ^  Lic>3i  <«^o^  J^  (_5»5  r-A 

(^\    e*>v^    o^   c>?.c)JoJl   JJl^    juIa*   kj^  >^)>    o>jXU^  »». 

eHV=^  ev*  ^^  t/^^-  o->.j^^  (J^^  o^j  ^^..  ^^^  «^^  (,>x»l3ccj 

e:>yJ4^  (^  0^  Oj^'  ci^^J  <>^-^=*"  <^'^  Jet^bJ^  (^^J^  >''' 

«  tf^-uXl^  V:/^  ^-^^  ^A*tf  (^M^ 

20  CM>yo.  e>AkUs^^^U^1  cJ>six>  kU==v^  c>^.J^  0>la>  (^jJ^  i«r 


1  After  jojJi  K  B  add  inn^N  |D  HV.  '^  fj^a  P;  -^NaB  celt. 

Line  7.  "ji  i:?y  IsyS^  (cp.  Fleischer,  Kl,  Schr.  i.  173).  1 1.  (.^.j.y^^  c*''- 

16.  U--J-S    ^-         20.  Uaiii*  \JoJ^. 

D  2 


1^1  ^^..^.^  dill  ^^1  jjy>^.  si^ju  u  i>  ^  J.U1I  w1;j1  J  i);i  ail  j^y  »"♦  oj-^ 

j^  Jta-l    --J1  Ijui   ^LC  i—iaj   ;ji*-J   ^jl   SjUX*  LJlS  (^JJlj    Q>»   i*^*/^  1  iijlc  (,-a.fl.)  5 
JxaJl  j^    s*Ui;_5   JLjU    ijflii.    >s5    dJl  ^^Ij    JW^ljJ  uJ/t    JJ  ^    sJLll  ^jl    a5oH1 

LbjI  Ijuftj  jjli  (jJo  JUj  (slUI  Jljo  ^jjS^  Lo  jJ  ^Uj  ^j\  J-J  ^y^xjl  elil  J^  jjlcj 

U5^'   U-Uo   \j^  \o^^   U-Ud   !<3L  ^li  {.^jJS  i^i\X\   l^j  (c>ii  ri 

^jJaJ    diij    sxUj^Ij    "•'l^^J    "4?^   >*J    !/^  Uj^I    ^-JL»j1    AjtJjb    ^JLaJI    («J-«. 
j.\jaj^    j^ji     *l^^L-.\  jA^    m     pi    niy   yty    t^Ji    jf\^\y    j»4JU.    ^^     j^X-' 

jUai  ev*    »-\cJ^<3«     tf,c>Ao     c><v::^     C->^<3     O^     2Uwt»     (»«^^i     y^  '"•' 
♦  CJ>^  ty^  ^-^i^*^  <>J»J«^2^  ev^  W*^*^  2uJ^^  tV?.J-^=^  O^  &Aiilw  rr 

(Jjt^  l«;U3j  oJ^i^J'j  (juijlaEu)!*  t)>^.c>aEv3i  I^a^^   ^y>t>>il  c>AAAA-  ro 


^  esUjj  M^;  corr.  from  Heb.  *  »^ — ^Ufl  om.  M";  suppl.  from  Heb. 

^  t:.-^  M2  (perh.  sL^Ji).     DnT'j!'  IH  D'i?  n^NlljN  (DHTi  |n  DH^  P)  Heb.       *  See 
note  15  on  preceding  page.     '  Prob.  b5x« ;  cp.  inf.  vii.  19.     «  DHamD  X  j  text  B  etc. 

Line  11.  ^jl-o  etc.  17.  sUlJj.  19.  sUL^,  %%>...  20.  ]^Li,  ^bb. 


— ^^—     |Jj   ^jl   jj    ^^\   jjbtjj    %/xi3  j.Uil   d^l    Ij^j    ool^    Uj   S^l   ^Jlkj   J   (sLil* 

u  ^^«  ^5/^bI^  (jLiir  °yfc  LijJ]^  ii>A  cvjtA'  ^y:^.  (^<3.3i 

^j!  J-J  (sUl  Jji  jj»j  <sUIl  »-w-J  U-»  j-»  (j->-Jj  f»Ldl  j^  jjfc  (j«L-J  ^^  iljl^^" 
lo  (»Uj  JLai  ^Jl  "^-^^^  Ci)^f^  (c*  isDi  (jK—   LIIJLi  dJoo  eUil  Jkj».b  ^^j  SjI^jJIj  pjJl 

♦  dJUil 


^  J^  J  M^;  corr.  from  Heb.         *  All  but  (^  obliterated  in  M'^;  Heb.  nnv  H^N. 

^  Heb.  mn  }»  pa^D  no  ns-iy^  dnjd^n  snn  nxn-'N  ""S  nxns  yn  n^i^N  |n  Pinyi 

P^-*  N»  D^yn^  DWO^N  Nin  nSllNS  D^Sy^N  ^3  Dipn  ^n^N  ^ibii.  *  DiflPerently 
worded  in  Heb.  ^  Om.  Heb.  «  liy^  add.  Heb.  ''  {^N  Heb.  ®  Om.  Heb. 
®  P3''D  ""n^N  '•B'i'N  *lQ"iy  1p  Heb.  "  Instead  of  tbis  paragraph  (suppl.  from  Heb.) 

M*^  has :  i>  ^^1  Jj^  ^  »jao  ^ji*  ^^  diLoj  tSS*  ^j\  i.^\  ^JUi  jjJliJ  ^j\  i\j\ 
«  8JL3  ^  oJi  ^_^1  laii  8JL.1  iJj.5  ^1  Ujl.  ^_^  o..,^..  "  D^b  Heb.  «  ^y  Ml 

^^  pN^  P;  N^N  cett.  Heb.  "  ni'N  Heb.  ^^  From  i\j\  to  *Ar--c  (p.  m,  1.  3)  is 

differently  worded  in  Heb.  ^*  Suppl.  from  P. 

[II.  3.]  D 


*  v^AJuobj  ey^Iaj  eJc>^!  p%U4!  (^^jb^jtxJ^oli 

s^ij    JjJiJ   Ltt  ^1.^:.:)    8^-y-»iJj    j»bil    ^/^   u^  J-*J    '^^    cs^  j'^^   J^    J^ 
8^]    JJjj.    »j|    C:^.^^   ^^    D^Dnon    ■^K'    w     slIS^  t5JJl    j»-.^l    A-^l     11*    fj 

<>>;L>lj  I  t^^ivcUaiiJU  »jLx/^s5ji3U  (_y^.J4jui4^  *U.^^^i  evo  cx-^^^  l>**aJ  *->  m^ 

2L>   <^J4^^W^^  II 
Jj».^  sJJ!  ^jl  '— ^r*i3  "^  iJi^   AJ  (jJUi  L»jlj  s-*^   ^J^  J!«J1  Jljo  J  8J\  jao  L«  ^J 


1  on  ^ba  B  K.         2  TID^NH  X.         »  sinyD  Heb.         *  }13^D  Heb.         ^  Om.  Heb. 
«  N^)  Heb.  ^  l^D^JK  nnn^Nia  N»  Heb.  «  For  seqq.  in  Heb. :  HONpN  in''  0''^' 

nns  |o  ^h  'ba  i^v^  hjn  ^yn^  p  ^a  man  nh  ^a  mvp  }nd  n»3ni  qh^  my 

li'T  ''bv  f\p^  12b  NV^N  in  njx  xnn  nyn  i>ip^Di  ddn^jn  no^h  Nmn^n^  ••n^N  ninv^x 

"ji  fi"iy  dn  i^i  n^  DNJci'N  ^q  nb  fic>3  p^n^^jn  ndjni  nosj  nm  |d.  ^  Heb. 

noi'N  nh  fitj'^  yn  n^^N. 

Line  i.  ^^.JJl,  ^yiJj-  3-  oJl  Ja  (cp.  Index  s.v.  a;  Fleischer,  A"?.  /Sc/ir. 

i.  147)-         5*  ^-i-^*^'-»«  15'j-*  u*^-)' 


— ^^ —     sji-6  Jjti    U    ii   *J    Jill   i'xto   ^\    dJiil    JjJ»    i-_a5j'  JlJL*    »jj-o   Jjts    L»  ^^   i^\Sj,^ 

i^£;;:^j  yl*  j^ij  J:jdj  i^  j5Ci\  ^J\«  ^i*-^*  ^r*  c^^M'  ^'^  u^  |«4jj^ 

M  def.  J^  (^^  dJi  Ji^  ^  aJl  ^  ^;1  xo  j^*    ♦  I  JyJl  |,Uj3  Nyn»^  pDnii  JU  U^ 

^.   ^ftiil'j  ^^    tj-UJl    (J«Xft-^9    islJJ^.    »]J^~-*J    (SJJ^^  ^^^    »-^j   ij-»    "^^    («^  »-l«Jj   /" 
jjij    *U5^  ^^^.    jJuJl    (^jt^    *U5JJ   JiJL>     "^1^   jJlJ\   ^jl   ^y   dli.    ^    isi^   (»4-ia->^ 

15  J^W  'U5C2W  (>aaS  ^   3J  (Jlj  Li<3«^  c>^c3  J^^   *UXi^  «oU^ 

■«ftl-;^    ^jS-   yiirtJ*   L»aJo.I    ^^»Ji.J    dJij    jt^l    ^Ji    j^-j-o    c*SjJJ    »Jl    ujjp 
5^   cJ^    Li(J^   '^^\   p^<>*  <JW>^<^  (J<i«»o!   2W:;.x40   >-y>^^    c>XiACw   ro 


^  DNJD  |0  Heb.  ^  ^^5^  ^_  s  ^^^pi  npl  Heb.  *  Om.  M. 

">  Om.  M.              «  npli?  P.  "^  NDDQ  B  D.  «  jnmN  D  P  Q.  »  ^b^^J  codd. 
^°  n^D^N  B  K  p. 

Line  I.   ^^■^:LLi\ .  9.  Ij^jhl.  L««j.  10.  l..y--wo.  15.  jLo. 


j^Lii  j^  dJi  Jlc  jJJb  5_^j  jU^l;  J-AJl  N^3»n  sJyb/  ^];lj  Pllim  f  pi  Dm  np     I-  J-^fli 

^J^joj  jo^„  j^  (s)iJl4  siTjUJi  eUL.  w!^  piD^JD  t:i^r\'Q\  ps^JD  NnynD  Jls  *j    «  ^'  ^r  jj--1j 

.  JL«J1    ^y^  djill  *lib"2  %j\    Ca^-w    ^^    p^»   Dpn»i    JLc   Niyno    *X5j    Jo^    j^     — "*— 
nPa    Nin    sJ^'j        ♦  ii^Jillj  i.»5Ji   ^Ikcl    jU  sJJl  Uilj    *4— ^^    v:y^i'  ^;^  dJi   jji 

jl  LfrJi  J-^J^  iJ  (>x  ^9  ^  *W^^  slLj"  ^-*-JiJl  *ic  Jl^°  M  J^-^  Nnp^»y 

jJi5j1j  u-JLilll   t^JU.  ^^^  !s.JLc  i_fljb    i)  t^jjl  j_;«\jj\   ^^*.*-<j  (^  UUi  I— i-iXj    sj  :>y  1° 

♦,  nvb  jnu  n^  -ipin  ^v  ^jn  JU  uT  I^j  v_i,U  _^j  x»l  J5^  ^  ly.^  ^j     ^  .v  'qt 
^  ^,-a-J  ii  ^^^1  aJIU  ^^!i)  ^:>1  |_^,  ^^  Laj\  ^y:.-^  jjfcj  naiB^nn  n»  ynv  »Jj5j 
^^1  ^y  ja'«  U  v_j^.  US^^iyi  ^_^  ^^5  L»  ^^  ^^ij  jUflJi  jju».j  dJiiaJl 

L_jj^   aL-uJi  »1a  ^  ^jl    Joq  J     ♦  JLjIjJ  iJLiS^  dliil    »^   Lo^^  jUi"  bUii  ^5 
^c::j>.    iij/-!-?[j    JL»xiI    ^^    sJj.    La  ^JLc   j{j  sJDl   Jt-^    ^-ft^^j^    ^^-a   sj^    dJi    JLol^  20 


1  P  only ;  cett.  om.              ^  jjgj^  Q^y  ^p  .  pg^j,.     .^ij-.              a  ^  M  P ;  eett.  p. 

*  i3n»  Hcb.  5  I^D^K  Heb.              «  jj^  M  P;  cett.  nn»i^N ;   M  adds  JU  ^. 

7  pp^B''  Heb.  »  pyi  ^ijy  pyn  B.       «  nsn  Heb.       i"  d^xy  >^N  Heb. ;  n^y  ^^n  x. 

1'  L^j  M.  ^2  j^  ]vi             13  ^^  ]M             14  ,jj,^2  Hei,_             15  ^^  ^ 

"  Om.  M.  "  a^Ny  Heb.           ^^  N»3  Heb.          ^«  ^jy»  add.  Heb.         ^°  ^^  M; 

"ini  cett.  2i^^co£^fi                   22  j^p^tjj^  jjg|3^                  23  JU:  MP;  i)Nn  cett. 

2*  dJJiJ  M.  25  pyob^  dJU^.         ^'  Om.  M.         27  I-,,  Heb^ 

Line  5.  jJ^..  19.  r^JJ^. 


r  J.<ii      ^yyo     ^{jyO^    V^^    C5<>Ji     2Uw!     {jS-f)    cJ^^    <JW>^'->    L,V>=»-^    l*  • 

Jax^  «^U4^  (Hvi^^  ^Ui\  cJ^/r^  '»-^j)b^U  <-^^bJ^^y?ij«^  y^j  t*' 

♦  2Ulai3|^  ^5*^^   »^;jdU    *UX^vA3   jU5ooJ! 
♦  ((j>5Uw  (J-^y)  (J^VA/^ 

♦  Uxftc 
10  ^;JJizftJ    ^  j_^^  JLJl  *4J    i-_fiJL5o  ^^\■'  ^  «JLJ1  ^^   \jAio   ^\    i-jJ!p   iu\  Ae.\ 

Jfljsl  »--^"  ,y  D??'n  ^'^\>''  J^'^\  °J:uJl  ^;;^'  ^^  J^  iJ^J'^i^.  (-b>-" 
^  JjJLll  ^^  °1^  jJ^2j;j|  ^_i^*ij]  |3\  s3lj  eUi  ^j  j.4*y  u^^  cr* 
"•T   JLiii   ^LjlII    (_5iJ"    »-;-»^    ^    i^-^ft-    Jj>j  J^    ^'    »-UI  ^^C:.    &j\    *j        ♦  dJlsr* 

uT  jo^  ^^  i^^j  lS^  j^^  y.^.  °.y  ^j^o  ^^1  L.1^  jv;}!  r^>*j  m'* 

ro'"o°w  o-*j"  ^^^--*^^  J-r^  '^'"^  *^^-  -^y  «'J»^^'*  «'^'^V  N2^"o  «i'ii  J^  (^'     *"2 


1  T13»  B  K  X;  d^  M.         2  iJ^l  M.         ^  ^1  M.  *  Om.  X.         '  ijbl  M. 

«  LlJJo  M.  "^  Om.  M.  8  ^nn  nijN  p.  ^  Om,  (apparently)  M.  ^^  J^^JJ, 

*^l  M.  ^^  -ID^N  f\^:i  Heb.  ^^  ^^t,^^  Heb.  "  Heb.  pNJyO  or  |^^N3ytt 

^^:Nyo)j  M  ^Wj^.        "  Om.  B.       ''  ^^  JM.       ''  Gj  M.        "  Om.  M. 
i«  Om.  X.         "  Om.  P  M. 

Line  i.  ^JSi^i,  ^U-*-  lO-  ]^-i-^- 


t^jjli      ♦  °»^^^>wJj«  j»\jdl  jjLc   »-M)   J^    (j-»    *r--s-?.   UjIj  ^^1  ^  aI^I  (Jlc   <—«-£.>     f  J-ai 
vi*-c*    (^    dlij    dUuJJ    JUb     »JU-i    »^,^...pjj     j»Lil    soUXl    ^^    dJiil    cJi^   ' ''  ^J^^ 

»— j^J    JLJIjJ    dJi    (__LiJoj    siyjJo    Ljo    UU^    Jjb    *l.«Xa.    l_>Jl51J    ^l.:Al 

S^^     i)     jI/***^^     l-Xi>0    jJij     oLaLlil     C?;^   yA     L?JJ^     (J-sJ     »^^1     Xou     jjJI     &jl!^1  5 

^^  J^W  'UX^  '5^i>  ^  "^"^'^^  cJW*^<^  b^o-A^.  1<3  U  cJi>31 

A^lifc  °*A/**   J-^J   ci>V^    ^    U^    ]^-J-c    *4J^®  (*"trs^    ^   ci>^^    ^   (^^''JLJl 
(_JLo!l>    4>liASh.     cJLuJ  JLuJ)    (>aJJ)  ^^laA/O    ^    cJVa>1jJ    t>X/U,2w    n         15 
»-ft^.'>    /*-^    (♦ft'*    J^iyi    ijljj     ■» a v T ij^  JUl     u-oJtJ     |_^   iiJoli    ^jSii    J    UU 

^LIJJ    Jls  JLib   ^^1   cC/J  ^1  I  J5CJ1   ^^   Ue   |,4JLo    jc>lj  x^l  y   Jj   j^Ldl 

j-x*^    cUaJLJl.    *JLwJI    8^^^  jJij     dLiil     Sfioj    (jJJl     *lill    JLoljJ    (j^,«l    »j!     JL^U    (£]lJ3 

♦  *-J^  ^y^  jsT  i^jV^  Loj  uj^  ^^1  j-»^j  (.-^1  jjj  j-j^i  ^^-0 


M 


^  nn^DSni  D  K,  omitting  the  rest.         ^  HNDJ  K.         ^  Prob.  U-i.  *  DHnyniN 

P  Xj  text  B  K.         »  Om.  B.  «  Om.  B.         '  p  inxi  ^53^  P  X ;  text  B  K. 

Line  5.  jJ;-*.  13.  s.  Lliib.  22.  U-Jic  ^Lj*.. 


r  J^fli     J    *4il    e*i..-v    ^^    dlij    dUiil    ^j-^Jj    ^;^pl.>--5Jl    j^.   cy^   ^1  ^   cyUijLs*' 

-^^     j^jji    ^^    J:jd    j;Ji    dill    j])^l    !=>!    ^y    cJ^i/:^    b>ij    c^^-^    yi3    Jjb 

j^jia.    dJdl    «-JL1m-    Jl    «U.j   ^:>b    JLjU    (Jl  ^^    AiJ^l    UJi    Lijl    *A    (j>^. 

5  j^   8...  tvil   L«   J    ^;;-•-<»)   ii^l '  ty   »-5\— _)    dIXl   ^J1   JJ>^j    lU^    jUJ    ej-iXL*.! 

♦  J^b  *UXa-  Jj;i3  ^^  Li4>3^  .XUU  (^jJi 

U    ^^J^    t^CUJJ    Lic>5^    e>^^4^^  ^^^   ^^^    O^^J    L.AA.sa/o    10 
io(J>}£   zUAJOI  c>x;Ia;2w'^  .^341   Jt>i  0^  (»^v.iX^  (J-fi^j)   S-Sj-'^i^  'iluJ\    \(J 

♦  "JUiljJ  ^^^ 
.V  .n  Nnw  nsvnnD    *  nvi?  ^^  jj>jj  nay     *  jw  nyi  p^N  }»i  Jju  tn  ^^^  ij-^-U  pns 

Jl  _^.JcJlj   ^y  1  S,   JLjIj   ^1  4-i/:      ♦  NS''Vn   g*^   J^    il-^UJl   iiJ   ^^  J^ 

JlJj  Jji^jJb   i^JLc  ^Lil  lUL^   Jx*=--J   i)j    sJU-^,  isUXl    ^j\  ^yi)  ±s.   Uii  sJbij 
J.»jo  t^B ,.>...H  ^^iSj  dJi  ^Jl  (sUll  iu.Uj.lj  dl^Il  ^y  iJLm.j  »-J1  Jsi-j  j^y^jfc  iJ  ijiLi**.! 

20  «  (^Clil_^UiL^ 


'  n^N  codd.        2  -i^xiD^N  -l^KD  D.        '  fiijDD^N  K.        *  ^Nn^JNI  nCN^Nl  nSIJ^JN  B. 
«  Om.  D  X  P  (suppl.  in  marg.) ;  ins.  B.        «  hx  ^2  codd.       ''  D^  D  K  X ;  text  B  P. 

Line  2.  'wo^.  3.  ^^jiJL.*,.  4.  l^LiJb.  8,  9.  ^^.jJl.  14.  Cp.  Index 

s.v.  ijyL^,.^.  15.  li^.  18.  iljli  Vjl,  \x::ii\.  19.  l::ij. 

C  2 


iliJl    dLSju^    ^^   dUdl  °Uj\   yUi^   JXJI   ^  uj>^'   i^j   J^^   ^^   (sUil  I  •  oj-^ 
t^jjl  ^_5^1  Iju^.  °»*l«iLa.   ^U,®  djJL--   (^JJl   dyil   ^^   J^l   Jjk   JjlxJI  Jlc 

j^i  li'Uii^j  jLob  ijj-aj  j»4Jl  J  ^j  ^n^N  i6  pHNi  yu  jjiJi  -^  t^^y 

iSJ'^\  j^    (sUi    Jj:    c_aJb   (j^  ^0    y Uj    JJ4JI    *U5CL   Jl    »J»    uJ/^^-Hj    ^"^^^ 

'"^^^  (J^  ];-^^c,x>ax^  M^  c>^  ^^  ^i>^  e^-ve-  ev^  "*      15 

vj)\.»3,j     <JU>!o    O^iia^    oAJyiiU     ^UXsJU     o^^^    KXuJL    ir 


*  5iyT  Dinn  DJ3 


^  p6N3  K.       2  -i^j^  ijxpa  K.       3  -,-,-,  jjo^jj       4  Prob.Uiij.       ^n>nyn  ^a 
^^•n  codd.      «  DHNMn  n^Nta  K.     ''  ^iba  codd.     «  xnnna^  codd.      »  ,-,j^^  p  ^ . 

nsi  B  K.         "  Prob.  add.  L^a. 


— H —    nma  ^  n^oi  J^j    ♦  ^LdLi  ^J^^  ^j  y^  ^^^  (»Uil  Jj  y_^  ^j\  yt^  jo.1j 

5  -jJ^eLj  Lft  *^^.^   /*J>^.    (5*-*^  Cjii^l    rs-»^   i_^»    istilx*   j,LJ.l  jljo   ^js?   <J^y^ 

Iju*    JJU    ^_5Lc    [^yyi    Jl    ^^j^-o    °is\]    ^jyso'    ^\    ^j^yo    ^^x^    ^^.    jS' 
lo  CaS^I    11a  J^  *4Jl    v^  >  N.-*.    5l  (,4i::-ib  Jj    u.    *4^tiiJ    J^    L*    elli    ^j    jj-jlU 
jj\   IjJ^  Jj    uj^JLk*  ^.^JLc   kijjcLa.l    L»   XLc  v:u5^i    Iju*  ^y^    dJi    ij^Xj   l^lb 

lj»>...  IXii  nn^ntin  nma  nijoi  ^  JIj  dJjJj    *  cC/j  jj^"  Uj  jO-J^j  ^^  (»Ll. 

15  ^1   ^^   &J^Xi>    I^IS    L«   ^y   ^  ft ...  oil    ly.A5o   fj\   (Jl   Ijpa-ol "  ^,-J>.^l   Jylll  \jui   &JL-» 

^  •    LUujb!    (jLiOJ    Oa*a3    U^^*^.    '^^^   p^<>*    OA^!  J>.*u^l    ^^^^^    '  • 
evATi.  t;yo  ^L^NjJi  ,^J^^i^h.  '^^^  pU<^^  Li<>3i  Oe;b)^  C5^  (:;luCi^ 

J53  Jluo;*  jJ  ^Jjk  Jt^  juAT  ^^IkU^  j^  XU"  jr  (_$j.3\ 

20  ♦   /^IcX-UlkTi    tJ^JLLiJ*^*    (^aJjUAAj 


1  Prob.  XS^.  2  oijS  K  X  ;  text  B  P.  '  mn^  K  X ;  text  B  P. 

'  Om.  K  X  ;  text  B  P.  »  p  i6  codd.     After  u  B  P  add  |nnynn  pDin. 

'  fjNn^N  511"^n  pr  ribi'  p  codd.  '  ^N  pQP>  only  K.  »  N^  codd. 

'  :  nnn^ND^i— p3^  in  ni^  vh  n»i  anni'Nta^i  K;  rrain  p  x.  i°  Nn^  n^  x. 

"  n-inN  BPX;  text  K.  ^2  Prob.j::;!.  i=»  I^D^JN  BPX;  text  K.  '*  ti>b 

B  P  X ;  text  K. 

Line  4.  Cp.  Index  s.v.  ^.        5.  ^X^y.        7.  jij^.       8.  UJLs*.       13.  ^jyiJt'x>,y. 
14.  ULi-«,^j>.         17.  jjj^lx-X)1.         17.  Cp.  Fleischer,  Kl.  Schr.  i.  148. 

[11.  3-]  C 


iLJUji  jjLa^j   w^Uj|«  /*-^  1*^  i_.iuil  ». «-M>ijj  f»L;^l  ^jjjjti  °^;.$  jj\  ^^J  Jls* 

JU  us  Jpl  Ji-0  i-JU  j^y  IjjUI  t/JLi*'  IjJls^  Jj  sj^jj  sJw^j  5 

I  ♦jASCVi   ^^yyovis*   tftSAAjJ   t^lUl    (J  Jo,  f*^\    ^^^J    2^^   ^^W^    ^  ^•^^• 

<f  j->.\   Jjj  j^   JU  dJS  jLfi  jjjj   jj«J  lo 

^^_^   0^<3  L.5<3^^    (*^^/^   L^<>^^    Ca-6^   (jv*   (o^*^^  j^)  o^y^*^ 
JvAXi.   viAj  Ji  lJc>3^  c^^^^  (^^i>^    (J^*^   W'^  i».xijilys    oUui*  15 

pUil    -J^aj    <.i*-A    fjji    dlij   ciJi/Xaj    ^j    vjla^"    iS'^Ji  ^;5CaJl    «_5^^5Co    ^yj^^ 

*  Perh.  ^^  a  Om.  Heb.  =»  Om.  B  P.  *  jr^^ub  ^'  ^  ^  1^  ^'^^  ^^P 
ji  }N  TVa  D3^  anx  nn^DDm  &NJD^N  "•Jianyn  nrua ;  K  X  omit  the  whole  par.  (as 
for  as  j,ljdb).         "  ^xb^JN  Heb.  «  ^Np  K  X;  text  B  P.         "^  DH'-NI  codd.;  the 

passage  is  mutilated.  «  hTTm  K,  *  T'DDD  N^  codd.  "  mnsi  om.  B  P; 

something  like  .  ta^->  ^^li  has  fallen  out.  ^^  lIDVn  B  P.  ♦ 

Vax&\,\j^  \yB..       2.  Ij-jL-^.        3.  UJL».        5.  Lili*.       6.  JIj.       7.  ^;J^^J. 
9.  |^xcj.ii.  10.  V^.  12.  ^^JJ^,5Ji.-•,  i;j^L>,  ^  C*-**.,  ijl  (•J^  etc^ 

17.  yj^X^. 


n^ioi?  Tiin^  j,lftJ.l®  (ij--iJi  ^j   ^y^    ^^    i^^r^-   ^^   j.4-^    «^j^    u^" 
5  *  vniDi^jn 

"i;;::.^^!  lib  1^  I^Uli  ^no^n  D^n^°  Cr^p\  iiJ  ^i  iiJb«  ^^  JU  »il  ^^ 

♦  {^^AsaJi,  ^_J^^Y^  (i^^J  {j^^^*^  *Uaci"  tr^yaxtS*  pUJL^ 


*  NlOan  most  Heb.,  misunderstanding  U^.            '  Om.  Heb.  '  cj^  ^JiCj  M 

and  some  Heb.          *  DnsyTl  Heb.          »  i^jlSj  M.          «  Om.  Heb.  "^  l^U.  M. 

«  <^--.&Tj  M.         »  n^ia  Heb.         "  Om.  Heb.          "  HBinyO  Heb.  "  Om.  Heb. 

"  y^_— JJ  om.  Heb.               "  bap)  Heb.               »'  NTN  Heb.  "  nxi  Heb. 

"^.IvAjJlj  M.        "  Om.  Heb.       "  After  t^^^^^Jo^  Heb.  ins.  pDiyn.  ^^  VDpn  }NyDi> 

Heb.  (ep.  A.  E.  ad  h.  1.  Diy^Dp  niy^top  iB'yn  ION  ns^i).        "  caonij  P ;  D3Dn  K  X ; 

MDN^  B. 

•Lines.  Ul*.        6.  jjj^lx«JJl.       7-[^S-       12.  I^Ujo,  ^^^ixar*.        13.1^5. 


^  °4j-j^l  ti^ij  jj-liil  ol^.  ^2  8il  dJjj  n^nn  m^x  J^j^-  j^-  ^  ^^^— >J^  '  ^r"^ 
JU"  sil  s^  Jj^  (^DU''  ^^  i)  j^lj  p\ju  ^j  niD^n  JLSj     ♦  [sXLo  ^^]  5 

♦    8^.-^-^"    d^    JlC    JJ^    (SUJ    i;;l5^j.ldl    J    J-J    Ijl    ,_^ 

«  *^Cm  plcvi  ^y^j  li^j'^^  «-^U^  »^34!^U:^^  e>iv>y>^c>-u»50L  20 


1  Om.  Heb.  ^  pgj.  ^j^(  _^  -q^^  jj^ve  n^3i?N  nnSN.  '  nU^JK  Heb. 

*  ynns^N  Heb.         «  ni^ND  b  p.         «  jUi  m.         ^  ^^^^_^  ^^        8  ^^  jj^ 

«  Om.  Heb.  '°  ^s.--.^J  pU*  ^i  M.  "  ^NT  Heb.  ^^  Om.  Heb.  '=>  nl'£3S  Heb. 
"  1p3  Heb.  (passim).  ^^  ^^  M.  ^«  b'bbii  J3Din  ^S  K  ;  ^•'Ij^N  ny3  IHI  P  X ;  JJ^j  M; 
ij^ij  n^W  im  B.         "  ^^1  M.        ^»  IN^JN  --^N  K.  "  sLl  — 031  om.  M.   -    ^o  ^^^ 

codd.         "  ^j,^\  M.         22^1^1^  M.         "  ^3^  Heb.;  j^j  (?)  M. 

Lines  i,  3.  ^ .^ .•■•.:  >1.       i,  4.  ijAfi  v±*li.      6,  9.  ^,\jt-«.      16.  &y .,;.>.      i8.  iLJ.>. 


ri 


J-ai       wl    Lfljl^    J^AjiJ^   ^.nJj    J^l     i^    Jj.:^^    u-J^l    »;U*i    t/-X5ll     CU-^A    Jl    ,>jJi-flJL) 


j^lfe    Jlc    »iCU'^    Jjl   jJi     o«^     1^1    *-5b_^    dii.    vilJLJ    LLmj    ^    LlIj    U5 
^   j»Ul1  ^   c?JJl  ^  JUU  ^"^  °iSA\   Jj-P  jA  ^  U..1  Ysj,   dJji"  J^l 

ij^'  »il  P^  JlSj  (^^.-.jLw  eJU  jjLi  caI^U."  wl  J^  dJi  jjj  ^^o^  ^jd!)  n»y» 

P"i''T   n  ij^ni  sJjJJ  U^l)  tojJl  ^JLii  elU  ^,1  j^o   jj\  ^^^  c^  cfjJlj  jl*jo 
nb  .3  ^^  ^.  u^  J-^^  u-^^  ^^^-^.  ^  »^^  c^^^  cr'J  ^'^'^  n^yi  ^"*^  J^^'n  N^^^  ""^^ 

M  def 

i6  sIas.   (^JJl  dJLMi   ^^j-sJt^l  j»Uj    8.JlC  j»Jk    U  ^   Iji-o   *^1   j^^^J-sr^' _^L«  ^Js:■  ^ 

M'.na'QT   u*-^  '""^^  '^^J'^^  ^^^  l^'^   '^^  ^^^'^  ^^''^'^  ^"^^^^  *^->^  "-^J  ^3i  lijJjj  ^^U  jJ>^ 
«,yjJl    J».l     w,fl-«    ^jti    4-L-»    (j^«...Jl    |»::j   i;;!    J^    ill    »jJL>  ^1    Ja.1    .^^  ;.<    ^^;^ 


^  nnr^Ni  K  x ;  text  b  p.       «  n^^^^  codd.       '  na^oi?  ^in^  codd.       *  na^-"  b. 
*  nynxn^N  K.      «  Dnswa  K  X ;  hr\m  B  P ;  perh.  ^j^\.     '  nnnno  K  x ;  text  B  P. 

«  n^D^N  K.  ^  priN^ni  nno  Heb.  '°  NJn^D  'ipi?  nabo  Heb.  "  M  after  a 

lacuna  (from  the  word  ntJ'N)  proceeds:   il  Jj\j  ^^\  aJLw  ^j.*jt.*-»Jl  ^^  *4^J-»  j_^^  l>*^/2 
Jjb   diLo  ^Uj  J  sJ^  ^jljJuJI  ^JJi^  ^  \j^  Ji>\  j^cLj^    J^  »jl  Lul«i  [►Af^Ji  ^j  Jil)/-'^ 

X^ine  2.  1^.  lo.  15sJl».  II.  \^-*r^.-  l6.  Jy^  u^. 


♦  iJW>^^^;J'*w  ^y^  ♦  If 

^cys^y   «^1U1    ^-^     c-xiis    LSo^^    ^     iUXfih.    oUa^    J5^    r.  i  J-aJ 

L4-J  {jy^  u^  '^^  ^^  c^-iJJ'    c^^i-!^   vJuliJl    owoijl    L«    juxc    ijl    ^-j/i 

l^  J-flil  I^JlS  *4Jl  i—jjis  J    ♦  i-jL»   Jl^  ^45^  ^IjJ   »UI   ijl  Jjill  pXiJ  U->    dlij 

L»  jjLc  t-_iajj  ^il5Jl ^^^jfl-jj  ft^S.^  ^jlS  8Jl  ^J  duii  ^j  t-jLij  (^b  Jj  (^  *4-i*J  C5/sri 
«  ijOp^l  *^  iJ^  JtJLo  Jli  ^Lii  jjl  1^1  »^.»X  JjJ*  ».Jlc  j_5JUj  ^^  SoUSLa.  ^_5» 
i«oiUJl   JlJLC  J-a^j    ♦  tjJj-^il  ]^A51   Jj    ^j^  J5L>    *4-«iJl   IjJaJb®  Jj   8JLJJ0   \jSi,Z^ 

luai  ^  J^j  D^-ijJl  ^:iUj  jj^b  oj;U  LcUI,  J5T^^  Jj>!b"  °ij^-^^  J^."  u-j-y 
tj^j  i:yL«]U-^'  J5^bj    ijljJb   Jjbqj    5j   sill  ^^  UjjoIj   il*,jjjJl  ^^^^  U-^yi^i^  15 

^j^  i^^iil^L.  ^^j^^  ^^.  ^  ,j«Jj  D^c'DnJlj  a^vptJ'Jl  U>jj  D-uJl  d^l 

^  iij  ^  sji  ia*j.i3  ^^  ^:ju  jSb  ^J\  e^jjili  ^  j^M  ^^.  :^j  n^pK^  ^^415^ 
ivpB'n  i»N  ju  ''11a  jjl.  ^j»5  ^^^i^  ^^jj  ^^bLki"  ^^bJi  vb  J  «^Uj  u 

♦  VB'np  "-V  nx  INn''  ^^LJl  »^  j3^'  J^J  DDTlltJ^SJ  DK    TO  .3  Nnp 

'  .lb  'nn 


*  Dmai  X;  cett.  Dnn^^i.      ^  nin^  k.      «  Om.  b.      *  nxii  b  p.      « iDp^  b  p. 

«  1^11  (omitting  b^)  B  P.         '  \bn)  t^r  B  P.         »  Sic.         »  'nrii>*  B.    •     "  Om.  B  P. 
"  ^^IJ^ijNI  b^li'Sa  B  p.         12  jy  B  p  X;  text  K.         "  D^p^  B.         ^*  nONVtS  >£)  codd. 

"  Nn!?n»  ^ai  b  p. 

Line  3.  ^j]^^t  biri'  ^'  ];*^''i}>  (»4^  J^**-  7*  ^J^-  2*  bA*j. 

9.  U-jX*.  10.  ^jSyJq.  12.  ^^JJl.  14.  1>J[JU. 


5  "Li.  JJo  c)4i^j   »i^*A>   jJJi    j»jbUacl    (»4^H'^   e;U^^    *b)^^   '^ 

jJi    JUb    Loli   ^^lx-X!lJ"   *U5Cll    U^ji^."  i-i-li    J5^    ki>   JiCi    g^l; 

K5.3  snoan  nn>  »J^  Jju  dh^  ina  dyS^J^^  j^  l?;WJ^"  -^-^^  cr"  J^^J    *  c^^ 
ouA^^  j^^U^b!  j^U^o^s)  .^^  JU  c5c>3i  p^b)^  »^.W^  tv^  '^ 


*  Om.  B.  '  D"?.«l  B.  '  K  X;  niN2a  B  P.  *  Om.  B  P  X ;  ins.  K. 

»  NHinnO^  B  P  X;  text  K.             «  HD^ty  B  =  nQ^W  (P).              ^  DHQ  KPX;  DHQ  B. 

«  fl^i^N  B.      «  onnm  codd.      "  nooni  codd.      "  Nmsny  B  P.  "  p^jn^dd^n 

B  P  X ;  text  K.            "  NNIN^JN  K  X ;  text  B  P.            "  jN  B  P.  "  D^nD3  B  P. 

"  DNJD  B  P.             "  nnsnxK^  B  P.              "  n^^N  B  P.  "  d^q  b  p. 
^°  HNpani  B  p. 

Line  i  (ist).  U^lj  ];-J».           2.  i;,jJJ>b,  U_j.**j.           3-  H^*»-  5-  'J-^j- 
8.  jjjJlilx-jCjlj.         13.  ^^1. 

B  2 


\XA   eJJi   JjLftj   ji^   iXi  Jlc  jr4^J/»-  t^;*^  t^JJ^  J*A^  J^   u^.   ^-*J^»J^  «sUi     J  J.A4 
^^LJl   cyblfi  C;?;^r*  j_^  cij-^-^  (j^  "^^  U**^    */■*— ^    *J^  15*3    (•^1^   S;-iLft    l-i->Jj»> 

Ulj  'III  ^y  Joti   eJJjij  *^^   X-^  !L^_   Lo  ljj^  j_59  Jjta.  (jjJl  ^Lo   (^LJl 
^^^jjat-»*  j^l  ^  yjlJ'  j^il  LT  kjU^Ij  JLob  Jjsi  U  l^.L>i)   J  ^^_jJl  (slu^jl  15 

ji^^ji  j--,i  j.i;*j  j:iu  ^y  ij^.  jj  ^:i)  5I  ^jikJLJi  iijur*  j^^jlCj  jJ  ;j1j 

♦  ^^-fi^  (JuAj  »X*  dJi  jjLc  ^b  y^^-Jlj 


^  :r\m  codd.  «  Perh.  j_g9.  '  l^in  codd.  *  piHUD  eodd.,  scr.  ;;,jj,jlx*. 

»  |N^  KX;  text  B  P.  "  QnONyDi?N  K.  '  in^ba^l  B;  nNia^JNl  PX; 

text  K. 

Line  5.  ']r^y  10.  Ll-^a..  17.  ^jU.  20.  V^^. 


A  ^JJJJ  nNOttJ  cijJL"  jjj  ijjM>  isJL^  ^^  Jib  ii  tj\  yt^  ,jjti  ^as"*  Jjj  jJj  ij^an^ 

«*  i.   ij^    J   JbJj   i^J^l    ^^J^   d^lJJl    Jbi    M    JJJJ^    5»^J«^^    c^^.    o/^.    ^3 

»-JLc  J-iil  J.5  »jl  jj»_j  nonJl  ^j  *  *  *  ^;^-^^J  M  ^-<^  D"'nn">7i  non?  »Jj5 

20;_<J^    p.O^I     (^H;     (J^Ij    Lic>31     V;/U^3i     ^J!     JUsb    Jli»    M 

»  Prob.  ^.  »  n^^N  B. 

Line  2.  U.Xc.  3- ^;;^-  ^^- iiji-  13.  (^jj\  for  ^U  (cp.  Habicht, 

E'pistolae,  p.  53,  n.  92*).        22.  t^-?^- 

[n.3.]  B 


^^4^      i^j       i^^\      Aa^      (^yC      S^«^      j^*-?.      (^vw^      <^M,\       (^)^U    «  I  J-ai 

Ul,'  «-.lSl  cJJJl  j,^!  ij:s«  ^  8Jxi  \S*^_^  ^L-J  csUil  juvj'  ^^^  jj  " 

""lUDUi,  J^  (.4^]^  J***  *I1aJ1  JlJoiib  j»4jyi  cr-^j   (%^^-M^   Ih/  u^  -^y 

*   ftjir^    t3-ii^     ^^ j^  5    ^vjuyyc   (Jk/o LuJuv^A    pLj^uClo   LvaAjoJ* 

^y    JyiJl    dUi    JJLo    Jii^j  ••n^N    OB'S  "iVB'Db    n»{J'    n    »J    dji^^^UiiJ.    i_^vco 

*  Lttjl  illlJl  i6 


n  .T 


^  Dna^nnnh  B  P  X.       ^  Qnn>Nn3  Heb.       » IVp  I^JD^K  Heb.      *  tl7\'bv  add.  Heb. 
^  nh  add.  Heb.  «  3X3  Heb.  '  Heb.  r\^\!r\'0  ,}N3  ND3N^ 

DHNij  ^3  ^NnnyNijNa  nnjxii'N  lonni  DnjsinN  Niinn  |n  [iv^oi'N  nnan  nd  add.  B  p] 

nDKVta  \0  CinNIJ  baa.       '  Prob.  j^.       «  ysn>  B.       ^o  HJN  K  only;  cett.  om. 

Line  4-jAj^.  5-  ULi>Jo. 


5  Mj/-»  (_y  *^^^  »-J^  e^^"^  ft>^  o"'^  cr*  ^'   *^  M/3^^  ^S''^  ''J'*'''''  "^j 
^^^-.^    jJU    J5  ijIj    M    j,4J^    j^^    j,^Jl*J    ijjjc^^j    ja^l«    ^^jo    JHD    ^^301 

UU  »^^^  ^L,j^l  »ju*j  JUil  » ju*  »-i  e...-.>\ "  j^  JS '"  ^bJ-li'    ♦  jio 

M«  def.    ♦  i-jUjMl  nl^J  Oy^  i:,!]  u^^  j^^  ci)^  u^  I  t^^ "  u4>^^  "^^  t/  ^'^  U^ 

Ijub  jLJLi.1  ^^\  i^j  ♦  1^4^  ilj  jr4^  u.>ir*i  y^  ^  jr4J^  W>  u^^^J  W» 
•i|^  jJhl  ^  dlUl  (j^y^  cjl^     ♦  cUJlJ  s^L)  J"  U-JLc  «-&ijj  jy^)i\  i'SA  ij^i^  JS 

^  ^j\  M^j  |SDn  \:)y  |N3  new  Heb.         '  (-_aii  ^j^  M'.         '  M'^  iJL-Ji  corrected 

ij^^  n3nDi>N  D;  n3Dni»N  X;  r\:SnbK  P;  WDNnn^JN  B  (!).     *  mx^  b\>v  ni»iHeb. 

o^j  M2;  nnm  Heb.  «  n*  Heb.  '  NOan^N  Heb.  »  Heb.  HH  On^D  ^JJT 

nbvba  ci^r  p  b  D^i>  |nb  D^ijyn^^  etc.  •  nxna^  nax  pjiya  Heb.  >«  Om.  M*. 
"  o.w..7^1  M2;  vonr  DX;  y©naNB  P;  »:>,^^  «_iL»pl  sjj*  m^  b^ah^iba  nin 
'»no^N  B  p ;  'DHo^N  fj^N^bx  mni  (b^Nva^N  X)  bii)i2bti  nnn  x  D.     "  Prob.  t£;lUi; 

cp.  Dozy,  s.v.         "  NDN"I  codd.  "  M' 

.  .  .  Lfcfci^jo^b  (J  .  .  . 
j^^l  — »^  UaJ^^  ^,^\    ^J^  U3l  (?) 

"  The  Heb.  have  instead  ^3  S|Ni)33   nbvba   JD   DnJSI  Dnnij^VaS  D^J?  HJN  NOmnX 

fl-iB'N  ni'3^n  :a  |n  *s  (Dip  B  p)  noip  n:y  i^ns  NnN3n^i'  ^JKn^si  n'^iiba  p  r\m 
fiDN^N  mn. 

Line  6.  Jj^.        ii.  Cp.  Wright,  Ar.  Gr,  ii.  242.        12.  l^..^::5o.         13.  l^^IXxj. 
16.  Wp;  but  cp.  Fleischer,  ^?.  ScTir.  i.  81. 


.^L^^^^l  ^j  ^j^^^\  *Aj  JjL>  elL*   j^iU.1  <— i^)  »-J^'  "^^  jjl   w.^    — ^^ — 
Ja.jl   lul   i_ij!cj      ♦  D>ii,T  y3K>  T\i^2  nvNmainj   ni^in  "ib'n   nyn   nr  J^aj   n3.2:'ov 
L5*  (^  t5^  iij  Ujj^  ^Xi  jj  ^  jlj^l  » Iaj  »^^j.*ju.  eu-o  j_jiy  iij^  j(  ^Ij^l  5 

cW]/*^.  (^   C:>^   »^Wt^'  5./«c)^  t^wo,^  jjUiLt^j)   .^Cm  JUj  r 

2^lkJ!  o^'  «^im  K|j63  ev^j  " 
(^.c>.w^  jlajX\  ^_J</y4^j  oj^aaJI  ev"  (__^  j»-^  o**aJ  'sJLtb «  i" 

9S\L    ^aS    (^.<^\}]j     j^iaJ!    C5M^     »^jA\     lA^^J     »-*>^    J^    C5* 
Jyjl  ^^  wb  jCij  y^j  i^Ul  -y  j^  ^^  *U.j^\  ^iljl  ^  i)j  e^l  qj3  ^ 


M'  def. 


W 


W  def. 


^  i)2p  Heb.       2  om.  Ml      '  Om.  Heb.      *  Nn3  Dian^  Heb,      «  nonajj  D^nJjK 

Heb.         «  i.U.:iU  Ml         ^  jL^ill  ^^  a5,lkJl  ^^  M^;  ^^JN^jn  |d  Heb.         «  The 
rendering  in  Heb.  is  different:   fDHSCn — -lI3:»i'N  JNOm  Ty  D.TS  D""!)  pT^jiiK  ^^^^'3 

(D  Dno^fjynij)  DnD^y!?i— on^s  mp  pt^jni  risjnyoijN.        »  Corrupt  in  Heb.  n:K  siny 
i^N-iB^  }o  nr  nnn  |N3  ^i^jn  nDia  bin  n»N  p  B ;  idn  hjn  d.  w  Prob.  Js7 

"  Prob.  U?l. 

Line  I.  ilUS,  ^U  j^.  3.  uj5;^l.  15.  ej>?Al  16.  liUU. 


I  J^     (slLUj   <ji^*i-»   viJb*    »-J^.    l^    ^J\/,^^JJlJ>l   Q>3B>    ^^    T3y    D>p^in^   1^  \T1 
,      jt^  i«^   8.jt^  LS^l^    ''^l)   jJLJ^  ^^^^  iuti*y*-   s^l»j  s.xJl»  ^  B^LxJl  ajLmJI  ^ 

5  ^^  jU  *j^r*-  ttlJL.  jo  cxs*  iijl  e;^»J^  >aj  ^^  Q^p^iiT  i\oh\:h  n^TB'yn  mtyn 
eUL*  .Loj  Jjb  (sJJu  ^JLc  ^_jAfi  iXii  ^J^i^^^  ^-t^  »J  (.5'^  J-*.'^  <s)LL>  j^  c*^ 
Jjus*  min^  ^^o  DT'-in^  ni3^»i>  cni'B'  nJB'a  JU  d^l  jua.ii  icU»  t^jo  N  luJ^ 

T  .i"?  .3  n"T  Ul  J  ;  >  \  Cj   vns  riN  d^-ivd   h^jd  t^o^^    J^   Ui  ^b^^-^j    UL5L.   Jot^j 
1 1  iJL-JI     ^J    ( elU )    JjL>    csILL.    jjlj    ^J-is.^^    A^^  ^^^a-*    elU    ii:U»    o^    J^\ 

^  .13  .a  bbo  ifilt  ocs*"  *-5b^  J-a^  'l31  Pj^D^n  N^l  JlS  US^  » JJ  c***  pLJl  J-a*  elUi  JJLiSj 

1 6  nhmy^  ^22  n^D  nwnana   xa  JU^     ♦  »XL  ^^  iL^li  ii-Jl  ^^^i  jjb   eiLo 
»JI  ^  y^  »^C*i  ^  *U*  ^;Coo  »^,  y,b»  jj4i^  jj  °»jl  jjut\*  .TJjy  nyi 

Jb  US^fc*^  ^^  jAJI'^^Lk*  j»bli  »JLi:  v-i,-uijj ^^i-i^!  Jjb  csUU  jjl  J^ 

HI 


*  j.^-  .  . .  eJbJlj  wanting ;  the  codd.  giving  instead  pjD  a^N  Nini.      ^  «l"ie'!?N  B. 
3  Prob.  Jjo  Uj.         *  rhv  naxij  codd.  «  nan  in  naOW  codd.         «  2N3i>N  codd. 

'  Dn^DIN  Heb.  8  NDJ«  Heb.  »  ^jJ  M^. 

Line  3,  1x^3.         5.  ^^  redundant.  6,  8.  IaJLo.         8.  b.^.  9.  1*1,  ulSlj. 

14.  U--i^.  17.  (-jixxj.  18.  S^.  21.  ^  *U.j. 


*  cL-Jl  *Jla.   jJ   -.^   ^^i».   »-Jlc  5 
(sUU*  /o,^^  ^J^*-»  ^  *^LJ\  »-Jlc  JLob   slj  i^JJl  j,Ull^i  evoUJl  (Jo<ai3! 

^S'■^^\  ^j^\  Js.  tsUU-«    ^iJiiJl  j_5:jw  ^/  ^j  c5JJi  |imJl  ^  ^U3!  Ju*ail3\ 

♦^-tfLiJb  ciU-o  ^J-o  (ijJUJl  Li*Jl  jj)  eUi  Jfljj  J-aiJI  » ;  T^? 
♦ '•3K>  n''3_^   ^J-o  »^\  JJl  O-ii  Loj  sjI^  »-i_^^  jj»i\jiJi   (JuCJl)!         lo 

U  JL.  J  -^.  csUil^  JUj  sJJl  »U1  Lo  i^J^^SSj  JlikC  (_$L>lsJl  (JuoiJi 

*    *    *  -  ■-    |J.aXmi*    \jr  *  III    I  ^  ".  I  »  tv  ^jkJ/O    vA-mJi    IJJi    I  (^  '.  >  rf4  V   (<^>  ^j.  * -i-MiiJl    I  ;  y  t-w    IJU 
********  « 

iO-»    i^-J^  ^«4t    IjuUS    jJ    is.»^^    Lo    jJlc    ^-Jl^^^i    (SJlLo   ^^*Ji.«<    A■^«•    L^JLo    ^c-iiJ 

ijj5o  '•onsn  tniaJ  ^^^-^jl^  v*Jijj  non  wmJ  [,j-ijj^]  ii-.j*  sjl-,  i;;^::-^  ouU  dUj  15 
Jl5    US^°Jj>L)   dlLo   iiiU»    cxsr'   <u^)  crs-^    '^^^  i^^^j  ^r«-»   "^    iiiU»2i 


1  }2N  D  only ;  cett.  om.  ^  '^^^^^  codd.  ^  Prob.  add.  i:y!  (d,Lj  »JJ1). 

*  firiDI  codd.        6  X  has  3n3''  NTH  p  pIDD^JK  hx.       "  "bn  B.        '  Prob.  add.  J^l. 

«  piD  3  ba  i?D  riyxiD  nnn  b  p. 

Line  2.  sj^j.  ii.  sLL  13, 15.  m^xj.  14.  (.■qp.;  (cp. Fleischer,  Kl. 

Sckr.  i.  265). 


5  *4^Ja''  L.  ^J  aJpil  iW-iJ  ^;r'  *^'  !A^J   ^  'i''^'  "c'^  J^'*  cr*  (»^^^-^^^^' 

'LXH  c^JLLj  »-,,--J^  (sUlII  «T;  t^JJl  j^LJlI  ^^  ^jli'  L.  ^UJl  J,^! 
J-*^  ^^  pLdl  ^^  JWj'->  Jl1-J1  Jl  JUJj  liLsTf—  U-ii^  L.j  «^---aJ^  (»^^ 
10  ♦  iJUJ\  iJ^jdl  Jl 

.>^js-*^b  j^UI  v»JU>j  (^  ;  •;  ^.  )  »-oLsl  (^jJl   *i-Jl  ^^   eJUJ)  (Juoi31 

ijj-m  ^^  J--JI  csimi  ^  ft \  irtji  L«j  ^l/^)  j-*j^^- « *  I  *<•.■■•*■  ^^^  ^J^  (ju  t«j  »j 

»^^i7.>.  'iXil  i^U'j   »L^.   jjj  elUl    sT^   (JJJI   j.^^  /i   ^]P!  (Ju<ai3l 
15  ♦  j,X-Jl  »-JLc  JLs-ib  »^-«J  j_5Xj>.  ».-JLc  I^aaj   J. 

*-•  sJjij  u-^'  *J^*-*-  cH*  "^i/*  cT*  "''^^  <>^  \^jSi  o*»/«ljsJ!  (Jwoiil 

^  IntroductioQ  in  B  P  X  only.  B  P  commence  with  Heb.  and  Arab,  of  ver.  i,  then 
proceed  7N^3T  "hi^  Nin  2D3.  In  X  the  Heb.  and  Arab,  of  ver.  i  follow  the  words 
nijIN  (sic)  ^VS^N.  2  Obliterated  in  Xj  n>n  )D  B  P.  »  nnn^l  mam  niN33N  X. 

*  y»v  iNna^JN  Nini  B  p.  »  Prob.  ^.        «  nyta  ^3N  D  X  j  Dsyni  ^3n^n  b  p 

(ex  corr.).  ^  ^^t,  -^^^^   DHDH^  BD;   I^JD^N   HDIT  X;   'vbi<  HOT  (partly 

obliterated)  P.  *  *3N1D3^N  codd. 

Line  14.  s — lj.  18.  Cp.  Wright,  Ar.  Gr.  ii.  265. 

[11.3.]  "  A  2 


Si:ir5n  tivnn  hMTt  S'^ritrnn  'trn  it)  So 
:^"3  "-i^n  '•^y  3-^T  Sn  p':j!3  in  -^iSn  nD-- 


^     ■ 

lls^r^^       I  AAV 


"^nuhin  ^nmumin 


THE 


PALESTINIAN    VERSION 


OF    THE 


HOLY    SCRIPTURES 

J'tt?e  more  ;^tra5men(0 

RECENTLY     ACQUIRED     BY 

THE   BODLEIAN    LIBRARY 


EDITED 

WIT/f  INTRODUCTION  AND  ANNOTATIONS 

BY 

G.    H.    GWILLIAM,    B.D. 

FELLOW  OF   HERTFORD   COLLEGE 


0;cfot6 

AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS 
1893 


Bonbon 

HENRY    FROWDE 

Oxford  University  Press  Warehouse 

Amen  Corner,  E.C. 


MACMILLAN   &  CO.,    112   FOURTH  AVENUE 


CONTENTS 


Introduction  : —  -         pages 

Description  of  the  fragments,  §§  i,  2.  The  handwriting, 
§  3.  The  probable  date,  §  4.  The  dialect,  §  5.  Plan  of 
this  edition,  §  6.  The  relation  of  the  version  to  the  original 
in  the  O.  T.  fragment,  §7(1);  in  the  N.  T.  fragments,  §  7  (2)       v-xiii 

2  Timothy  I.  11-18  in  the  Peshitto,  the  Harclean,  and  the 

Palestinian xiv 

List  of  all  the  known  Remains  of  the  Palestinian  Version  xvi 

The  Greek  Readings  in  the  New  Testament  Fragments       .  xx 

List  of  Palestinian  and  other  Words  and  Forms         .         .  xxiv 

Notes  on  the  Syriac  Text  of  the  Fragments       .         .         .  xxvii 

Additional  Notes xl 

The    Syriac   Text    of   the    Bodleian    Fragments    with    an 

English  Translation 1-23 


a  a  [II.  5] 


Plate  I,   Numbers  IV.  46,  47;  49  —V.  2. 
Plate  II,    i  Thessalonians  IV.  10-15. 
Plate  III,   2  Timothy  I.  10-17. 


INTRODUCTION 


I.  Early  in  the  year  1891,  five  parchment  leaves  were  sent  to  the 
Bodleian  Library  from  Egypt,  where  they  had  been  procured  by  the 
late  Rev.  Greville  J.  Chester^.  The  leaves  are  palimpsests,  four  being 
rewritten  on  both  sides,  the  fifth  on  one  side  only.  The  upper 
writing  is  in  an  ancient  cursive  Hebrew  hand,  and  is  assigned  by 
Dr.  Neubauer  to  the  beginning  of  the  twelfth  century  of  our  era. 
It  consists  of  certain  portions  of  the  Mishnah,  and  as  these  will  be 
described  in  the  Appendix  to  Dr.  Neubauer's  Catalogue  of  Hebrew 
MSS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library^  a  further  account  of  them  is  un- 
necessary here.     Three  of  the  portions  are  shown  in  our  collotypes. 

The  Hebrew  of  these  fragments  is,  relatively,  of  little  value,  but 
the  mode  of  its  transmission  is  interesting ;  for,  as  I  am  informed  by 
Dr.  Neubauer,  whose  name  is  sufficient  guarantee  for  the  truth  of  the 
statement,  it  is  very  rare  indeed  to  find  portions  of  the  Mishnah 
copied  upon  the  writings  of  Christian  scribes.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  original  contents  of  these  palimpsests  are  interesting  and  valuable, 
both  to  the  theologian  and  the  grammarian.  The  leaf,  which  is  half 
palimpsest,  contains  some  verses  from  the  Book  of  Numbers,  and  these 
certainly  appear  to  belong  to  the  version  known  as  the  Palestinian 
Syriac  Old  Testament,  of  which  some  fragments  are  preserved  in  the 
British  Museum,  and  in  the  Imperial  Library,  St.  Petersburg.  The 
four  New  Testament  leaves  contain  several  verses  from  Colossiuns, 
I  Thessalonians,  2  Timothy,  and  Titus,  written  in  the  same  ^ialect  ^  as 

*  AIS.  Syr.  c.  ^  Bibl.  Bodl.  Readers,  who  are  unable  to  consult  the  originals,  will  find 
in  our  collotypes  not  only  reproductions  of  parts  of  the  text,  but  very  good  representations 
of  the  present  appearance  of  the  fragments. 

*  Called  the  Christian  {ox  Syrian) — Palestinian;  see  Traite  de  Gravunaire  Syriaque  (Duval), 
Introduction,  pp.  vii,  viii,  x. 


vi  INTRODUCTION. 

the  fragments  just  named,  and  the  Evangeliarium  Hierosolymitanum 
in  the  Vatican  Library.  They  confirm  the  inference  from  the  recently- 
discovered  Sinaitic  leaf  ^,  that  the  Pauline  Epistles  were  also  included 
in  the  Palestinian  Version. 

2.  The  collotypes,  which  we  have  prefixed,  show  the  present  sizes 
of  the  pages.  The  four  New  Testament  leaves  are  12  x  8^  inches. 
The  small  leaf  has  lost  about  five  lines  of  the  Syriac  writing.  It  must 
have  been  originally  about  seven  inches  square ;  it  is  now  5I  x  7. 
The  handwriting  of  the  four  leaves  is  a  very  fine  specimen  of  that 
particular  script,  and  the  acquisition  of  these  fragments  is  a  distinct 
gain  to  the  palaeographer.  They  will  occupy  a  place  of  their  own 
amongst  the  treasures  of  the  Bodleian  Library  ;  for,  as  we  shall  presently 
show,  there  is  good  reason  for  regarding  these  four  leaves  as  some  of 
the  oldest  extant  specimens  of  the  particular  hand  which  they  exhibit. 
The  writing  is  certainly  one  of  the  most  beautiful  examples  of  the 
style  with  which  we  are  acquainted,  and  bears  evident  indications  of 
great  antiquity,  whatever  may  be  the  actual  date  of  the  Syj:iac  MS; 
from  which  the  leaves  were  at  some  time  abstracted. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  four  leaves  are  inscribed  in  double  columns. 
Each  column  contains  22  lines.  The  letters  are  seldom  cramped,  and 
occasionally  a  word  is  a  good  deal  extended  to  fill  up  the  line^. 
It  is  clear  that  these  leaves,  which  are  connected  in  subject,  formed 
parts  of  one  codex.  The  odd  leaf  belonged  to  another  manuscript. 
It  also  has  two  columns,  and,  in  its  present  state,  shows  15  lines ; 
perhaps  originally  there  were  five  more  ^.  The  writing  is  smaller,  and, 
in  my  opinion,  later*;  but  it  is  well  executed.  This  leaf  was  turned 
upside  down  by  the  Jewish  scribe,  so  that  the  first  line  of  his  work 
is  at  the  bottom  of  the  page.  The  other  leaves  were  turned  half  round, 
and  some  of  the  pages  were  written  across  from  the  top  line  of  the 
Syriac,  some  from  the  bottom  line.  The  photograph  shows  th€  palimp- 
sest side  of  the  odd  leaf.     This  leaf  is  the  most  legible  of  the  five,  even 

'  See  pp.  xvi,  xvii.     It  contains  a  few  verses  of  Galatians. 

^  Examples  in  the  collotypes  are: — crowded  lines,  Plate  II,  col.  i,  11.  2,  6;  extended  words, 
col.  2,  1.  14,  Plate  III,  col.  2,  11.  12,  13. 

^  How  many  lines  there  were,  it  is  impossible  to  say,  until  we  know  whether  the  lacunae 
represent  as  much  as  the  Hebrew  contains,  or  whether  there  were  longer,  or  shorter,  readings. 

*  But  see  p.  10,  second  paragraph. 


INTRODUCTION.  vii 

on  its  palimpsest  side.  In  the  other  four,  while  the  upper  hand  has 
well  retained  its  original  blackness,  the  first  hand,  in  some  places,  has 
almost  faded  away,  in  others  has  changed  to  a  yellowish  brown  *. 
The  photograph,  on  the  whole,  has  served  to  bring  into  greater  clearness 
the  under  writing ;  but  the  loss  of  colour  deprives  the  reader  of  an 
advantage,  which  the  manuscript  itself  affords,  for  distinguishing  between 
the  hands  where  they  cross.  There  are  no  indications  of  a  second 
Syriac  hand,  unless  the  gloss  on  fol.  4  r  has  been  added  later ;  but 
I  do  not  think  that  its  hand  can  be  unhesitatingly  ascribed  to  another 
era.  The  letters  are  smaller;  but  so  also  are  the  characters  of  the 
Titles,  Subscriptions,  and  Rubrics — see  pp.  10  and  14. 

3.  The  distinctive  characteristics  of  the  Palestinian  script^  occur 
in  the  fragments,  and  are  shown  in  our  collotypes.  Ph  and  P 
are  represented  by  two  letters,  ^  and  its  inversion  ..2.  The  latter 
is  especially  used  for  the  Greek  tt,  as  in  the  proper  name  oocucu£, 
Paulus  ;  but  it  also  occurs  for  the  Syriac  ^  Kushaiattim  in  such  a  form  as 
QQ..£.'g3,  Collotype  III,  col.  i,  1.  12.  That  form  however  is  derived  {Thes. 
Syr.  3114)  from  TreTo-at,  although  it  is  conjugated  like  a  Syriac  verb.  On 
the  same  plate  (1.  14)  we  have  >JOiiia,  although  the  first  letter  must 
be  ^.  On  fol.  i  ra,  1.  19,  I  was  at  first  inclined  to  read  QoAcvAica*, 
and  am  still  doubtful,  for  the  letters  are  very  faint  and  obscure. 
'le/JOTToAts  would  require  ^,  but  a  dialectic  softening  into  ph  after  r  is 
conceivable.  We  may  compare  fol.  4vb,  1.  13,  where  tvttos  is  expressed 
by  ooaa.a\^.  Again  on  Plate  I,  col.  2, 1.  12,  will  be  found  taS*  rvs^srcfa, 
where  the  second  word  ought  to  begin  with  ^  =  a,  and  there  is  a  stop 
between  the  /  and  the  r.  It  may  be  thought  that  ^  and  ■&  have  some- 
times been  confused  through  carelessness;  but,  as  far  as  can  be  judged 
from  these  small  portions,  our  MSS.  were  carefully  transcribed,  con- 
trasting in  this  respect  very  favourably  with  Adler's  Evangeliarium ; 
so  that  perhaps  the  most  reasonable  supposition  is,  that  the  special 
character  &  was  only  employed  in  cases  where,  as  in  QttSLio,  it  was 
desirable  to  emphasize  the  hard  sound  of  the  p,  or,  as  in  ooO^^K' 
^ kpyJ.Ti-nos),  to  indicate  the  doubling  of  the  letter,  or,  as  in  ooixXo.^,  to 


*  Cf.  Dr.  Wright's  remarks   about  Cod.  Add.  B.  M.  14,450,  fol.  14,  in   Catalogue  of  the 
Syriac  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum,  Part  III,  p.  xxxii.  note,  and  the  page,  Plate  XVIII. 
°  Duval,  op.  cit.  §11. 


viii  INTRODUCTION. 

show  that  the  Greek  name  was  spelt  with  IT  and  not  '^  ^  The  iA 
in  the  proper  name,  Plate  III,  col.  2,  1.  12,  is  not  a  special  character: 
the  appendage  belongs  to  the  Hebrew^. 

D  is  always  written  i,  without  the  point,  but  R  is  i.  Other  letters 
are  occasionally  provided  with  diacritical  points,  as  w.^,  Plate  II,  col.  2, 
1.  12,  and  the  final  letter  of  rtlr-CLsa,  Plate  I,  col.  2,  1.  3.  Probably 
a  pr.  m.  points  were  much  used  to  distinguish  the  forms,  and  ('*) 
seems  to  have  been  regularly  written  upon  the  plurals ;  but  in  the 
present  state  of  the  pages  these  points  are  not  always  legible.  There 
are  only  a  few  instances  of  the  single  stop  (.),  but  an  example  of  its 
use  will  be  found  on  Plate  III,  col.  i,  1.  4.  On  the  other  hand  the 
double  (:)  is  legible  in  several  places,  and  appears  to  be  of  frequent 
occurrence;  at  2  Tim.  i.  18,  it  is  used  as  a  final  stop.  •:  and  :•  are 
used  on  fol.  i  v  a,  II.  9,  10,  as  ornaments  to  the  lines.  The  former  is  found 
at  Titus  ii.  3  and  8  as  a  subordinate  stop.  In  the  facsimile  in  Miniscalchi 
Erizzo  the  figures  •:  and  :• ,  in  red,  are  frequent  as  stops :  in  one  place 
there  are  four  points,  •:• . 

4.  It  is  impossible  to  assign  an  exact  date  to  these  fragments,  and 
difficult  even  to  say  to  what  century  they  belong.  At  present  there 
are  not  materials  available  for  dating  Palestinian  MSS.,  such  as  those 
which  abound  in  the  case  of  the  works  of  the  Edessene  and  Nestorian 
scribes  ^.  We  have  however  some  indications  of  the  history  of  the 
Palestinian  hand.  Our  starting-point  is  Adler's  Vatican  Evangeliarium, 
which  is  dated  1030  A.D.^  Of  undoubtedly  later  date  are  such  debased 
hands  as  that  of  Add.  14,664,  fol.  34  a,  and  possibly  that  of  fol.  26  b\ 
And  it  is  equally  clear  that  the  old  writing  on  fol.  14  of  Add.  14,450  is 

'  Dr.  Land  {Anecdota  Syriaca,  vol.  iv.  p.  214)  writes  of  the  London  and  St.  Petersburg  Pales- 
tinian fragments : — *  Ex  eo  quod  S  literam  omnes  Palestini  invertunt,  qua  Graecorum  w  exprimant, 
apparet,  earn  aspiratam  fuisse  praeter  voces  a  Graecis  sumptas  et  (in  Psalmis  certe  Londinen- 
sibus)  eas  in  quibus  S  dim  producebatur  sen  duplicatur  ; '  and  gives  as  examples  such  Syriac 
forms  as  u9(,  <**S(,  , '■«\ft  ■    with  inverted  S. 

^  See  the  note  on  the  place.  '  See  Studia  Biblica,  III,  p.  50,  n.  2. 

*  It  was  written  in  Antioch  'in  the  year  1341  of  Alexander  the  Greek;'  see  colophon 
quoted  in  Versiones  Syriacae  (Adler),  p.  139,  and  Evangeliarium  Hierosolymitanum  (Miniscalchi 
Erizzo),  p.  576.  Dr.  Wright,  op.  cit.  p.  xxxii.  note  §,  accepted  the  date,  and  I  do  not  know  that 
there  is  any  reason  for  questioning  the  statement  of  the  colophon. 

^  See  Plates  XIX,  XX,  in  Wright's  Catalogue;  also  the  interesting  series  of  seven  facsimiles 
annexed  to  Professor  Land's  Anecdota  Syriaca,  vol.  iv. 


INTRODUCTION.  ix 

older  than  that  of  Adler's  MS.  Of  this  leaf  Dr.  Wright  said,  '  I  can 
only  hazard  a  conjecture  that  it  belongs  to  the  eighth  or  ninth  century  ^' 
These  indications,  though  slight,  are  consistent,  and  point  to  a  distinct 
decadence  in  the  script  from  the  eighth  century,  attendant,  no  doubt, 
on  the  decadence  of  the  sect  to  which  the  dialect  and  the  characters 
belonged.  Now  if  our  facsimiles  be  compared  with  fol.  14  of  Add.  14,450, 
the  oldest  specimen  in  the  British  Museum,  it  will  be  recognised  that  our 
four  leaves  are  at  least  not  inferior  to  it  in  beauty  of  execution,  as  well  as 
in  freedom  from  what  Wright  calls  the  almost  hideous  exaggeration  and 
distortion  of  every  peculiarity,  with  which  the  latest  hands  abound. 
The  writing  is  bold  and  firm,  and  not  inelegant,  and  certainly  seems  to 
belong  to  the  best  period  of  the  style  ^.  It  will  not,  I  think,  be 
unreasonable  to  suppose  that  it  is  at  least  as  old  as  the  palimpsest 
leaf  of  Add.  14,450,  and  I  am  somewhat  disposed  to  believe  that 
it  is  a  little  older.  In  any  case,  it  can  hardly  be  assigned  to  a  later 
date  than  the  eighth  century.  The  single  leaf,  which  is  written  in 
the  smaller  characters  of  another  hand,  is  also  very  ancient ;  but 
I  am  inclined  to  think  that  it  belonged  to  a  MS.  which  was  written 
a  little  later  than  that  to  which  the  four  leaves  belonged. 

After  I  had  arrived  independently  at  these  conclusions,  I  received 
an  interesting  confirmation  of  my  opinion.  Copies  of  the  three  collo- 
types were  submitted  to  the  Rev.  George  Margoliouth  ^,  whose  position 

*  Op.  cit.  Part  III,  p.  xxxii.  Fol.  26  b,  I  adduce  with  hesitation,  because  Wright  was 
disposed  to  '  assign  it  to  the  tenth  or  eleventh  century.'  The  reader  should  compare  Plate  XIX 
with  the  facsimile  in  Miniscalchi  Erizzo.  Mr.  G.  Margoliouth  has  called  my  attention  to  an 
ambiguity  in  Wright's  statements  about  fol.  14  of  Add.  14,450.  Op.  cit.  I,  p.  55,  he  remarks 
that  the  fol.  is  '  perhaps  of  not  much  later  date  than  the  rest  of  the  volume.'  Shortly  before 
he  had  said  that  the  writing  of  the  MS.  'is  a  fine  regular  Estrangela  of  the  seventh  century.' 
If  with  these  statements  his  opinion  on  p.  xxxii  of  Catalogue  Part  III  be  compared,  it  will  be 
seen  that  he  exhibits  an  uncertainty  about  the  date.  But  Mr,  Margoliouth  adds,  '  It  certainly 
appears  to  me  that  the  underlying  text  of  fol.  14  is  not  later  than  the  seventh  century  (at  any 
rate  not  much  later),  especially  considering  that  the  text  written  over  it  cannot,  I  think,  be 
placed  very  late  either,' 

*  Land,  by  a  comparison  of  individual  letters,  especially  the  «^and  «»,  arranged  the  extant 
Palestinian  documents  in  a  series,  of  which  the  St.  Petersburg  Gospel  Fragments  are  among  the 
oldest,  and  the  London  Hymns  among  the  youngest.  Comparing  this  series  with  the  dates 
which  Wright  gave  to  the  London  MSS,  he  finds  an  independent  confirmation  of  his  judgment. 
Op.  cit.  pp.  213,  232. 

'  C.  C.  C,  Camb.,  Tyrwhitt  Hebrew  Scholar,  and  now  Senior  Assistant  in  the  Oriental 
Department  of  Printed  Books  and  MSS.,  British  Museum. 

b  [II.  5-] 


X  INTRODUCTION. 

affords  peculiar  facilities  for  forming  a  judgment  on  the  date  and 
character  of  an  Oriental  document.  After  a  careful  inspection,  he 
wrote  to  me  as  follows  : — 

'  There  certainly  is  a  considerable  likeness  between  the  Palestinian 
text  of  fol.  14  in  Add.  14,450  and  the  Syriac  of  your  MS.  I  am  myself 
inclined  to  think  that  the  former  is  somewhat  older,  as  the  writing 
is  a  little  more  flowing,  but  much  difference  there  is  not  between  the 
two,  and  it  appears  to  me  that  both  may  belong  to  the  seventh  century. 
You  would,  I  suppose,  look  upon  the  smaller  page  as  showing  a  smaller 
hand  of  about  the  same  age,  and  this  is  also  the  impression  which  it 
at  present  makes  upon  me.' 

The  remark  that  the  odd  leaf  may  be  written  in  *  a  smaller  hand  of 
about  the  same  age,'  is  important.  A  difference  of  hand  in  these  and 
other  ancient  documents,  may  indicate  rather  a  different  scribe,  or 
a  different  locality,  than  a  different  date.  It  may  also  be  well  to 
point  out,  that  the  absence  of  vowel -marks  from  our  fragments  is 
not,  in  such  writings,  an  indication  of  antiquity.  A  reference  to  Plates 
XIX  and  XX  in  the  B.  M.  Catalogue,  Part  III,  will  show  that  much 
younger  Palestinian  MSS.  were  written  without  vowels  ;  but  the  Vatican 
Evangeliarmm,  according  to  the  facsimile  in  Miniscalchi  Erizzo,  has 
more  diacritical  points  than  can  now  be  distinguished  in  our  fragments. 

In  a  subsequent  communication,  Mr.  Margoliouth  informed  me  that 
Professor  Land,  of  Leyden,  had  seen  the  collotypes,  and  thought  the 
hand  of  the  four  leaves  might  be  a  little  older  than  that  of  fol.  14  of  Add. 
14,450.  I  trust  that  the  courteous  and  learned  Professor  will  pardon  my 
quoting  as  an  opinion,  what  at  present  is  the  result  of  a  first  impression  ; 
still,  his  words,  as  far  as  they  go,  are  an  interesting  and  independent 
confirmation,  by  an  authority  on  the  subject,  of  the  view  we  expressed 
above.  To  sum  up  then,  we  may,  with  considerable  confidence,  conclude 
that  the  four  pieces  are  in  a  seventh  or  eighth  century  hand,  while  the 
fifth  fragment  was  written  somewhat,  but  not  much,  later. 

5.  With  greater  certainty  can  we  determine  the  dialect  of  these 
fragments,  and  the  version,  or  versions,  to  which  they  belong.  The 
leaves  are  written  in  the  characters  which  appear  to  be  peculiar  to 
what  has  been  named  Palestinian  Syriac,  and  the  features  of  that 
dialect  are  distinctly  marked.  *  is  used,  like  the  Hebrew  '',  in  the 
formation   of  the   future   tense.      Chaldaic  forms,  Hebrew  words,  and 


INTRODUCTION.  xi 

many  words  and  forms  which  can  only  be  paralleled  from  Adler's 
Evangeliarium  and  the  related  documents,  abound  in  the  short  compass 
of  the  few  verses  which  our  fragments  contain.  From  all  these  facts 
it  is  clear  that  the  fragments  are  portions  of  translations  into  the 
Palestinian  Syriac ;  but,  as  they  stand  at  present  alone,  and  we  have  no 
other  MSS.  of  translations  of  the  same  parts  with  which  to  compare 
them,  it  is  impossible  yet  to  decide  whether  these,  and  the  other  extant 
remains,  all  belong  to  one  version,  or  whether  there  were  several  versions 
of  larger  or  smaller  parts  of  the  Bible,  by  different  hands.  It  is  however 
significant  that  in  the  Gospels,  where  comparison  of  documents  is  possible, 
it  is  evident  that  the  extant  remains  are  all  parts  of  different  copies  of 
the  same  text^.    But  this  might  be  expected  in  the  case  of  Evangeliaria. 

6.  The  reader  will  judge  for  himself  from  the  collotypes  that,  in  the 
preparation  of  this  edition  of  the  fragments,  the  work  of  deciphering 
has  not  been  easy.  But  by  patient  labour  in  bright  sunlight  the 
difficulties  have  been  overcome,  and  I  am  confident  of  the  correctness 
of  the  transcripts  as  a  whole,  although  a  few  words  and  letters  are  perhaps 
not  quite  certain.  We  have  printed  the  Syriac  in  columns,  each  of  which 
agrees  in  all  respects  with  the  corresponding  column  in  the  MS.,  except 
that  the  exigencies  of  type-setting  do  not  always  allow  that  regularity  in 
length  of  line,  which  the  handwriting  exhibits.  The  text  is  given  exactly 
as  it  stands  in  the  MSS.,  so  that — 

(i)  Letters  or  words  which  are  illegible,  and  have  been  restored, 
are  added  in  brackets. 

(2)  The  plural  marks,  and  stops,  are  only  given  where  they  can  be  read 
in  the  original.    Those  which  are  supplied  are  expressed  by  small  circles. 

(3)  But  the  point  on  \  has  been  added  where  illegible,  as  it  was 
evidently  the  rule  of  the  scribe  to  use  it,  and  the  absence  of  it  may  be 
attributed  to  the  state  of  the  MS.  at  that  particular  place. 

(4)  Smaller  type  has  been  used  where  a  Title,  Colophon,  or  Gloss  was 
written  smaller  in  the  MS. 

The  translation  is  as  literal,  and  as  much  in  the  exact  order  of  the 
Syriac  text,  as  the  English  idiom  will  allow.  Words  which  are  not  in 
the  Syriac  are  put  in  italic  type  in  the  English.     The  representation  of 

*  In  Land,  op.  cit.  IV  (Evangeliaria  Londinensia  et  Petropolitana),  it  will  be  seen  how  defects 
of  words,  and  even  letters,  can  in  the  London  (pp.  11 4-1 19)  and  in  the  St.  Petersburg  (pp.  144, 
145)  be  supplied  from  the  Roman  copy. 

b  2 


xii  INTRODUCTION. 

Semitic  names  in  English  is  always  difficult:  in  these  fragments  the 
difficulty  is  increased  by  the  ambiguity  of  the  originals,  through  the 
absence  of  vowels.  Particulars  will  be  found  in  the  Notes;  but  in 
general  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  long  o  may  be  long  «,  or  vice  versa,  as 
o  stands  for  both.  The  short  vowels  are  inserted  by  analogy,  but  in 
many  cases  the  d,  ^,  or  i',  which  has  been  adopted,  may  be  changed  for 
one  of  the  other  two.  The  consonants  A^,  &,  a  are  represented 
by  /,  c,  k.  The  reader  is  reminded  that  c  never  has  in  Syriac  the 
sound  of  a  sibilant. 

7.  In  the  Notes  on  the  Syriac  text,  we  have  touched  on  various 
questions  which  arise  in  connection  with  the  character  of  the  trans- 
lations contained  in  the  present  fragments. 

(1)  In  regard  to  the  Old  Testament,  we  have  indicated  some  points 
of  resemblance  and  of  difference  between  our  text  and  the  Peshitto. 
The  reader  who  compares  the  two,  line  by  line,  will  discover  that  the 
divergences  are  so  numerous,  that  they  forbid  the  supposition  that 
ours  is  a  revision  of  the  Peshitto.  The  resemblance  to  the  LXX.  is 
certainly  striking  ^ ;  but  the  influence  of  the  Hebrew  is  so  apparent, 
that  it  is  impossible  that  the  version  could  have  assumed  its  present 
form  without  some  reference  to  the  Hebrew  original. 

(2)  In  connection  with  our  New  Testament  fragments,  three  inter- 
esting questions  arise :  (a)  How  are  they  related  to  the  remains  of  the 
Palestine  Version?  {fi)  Is  the  translation  dependent  on  the  Peshitto, 
and  its  Harclean  revision.?  (y)  To  what  type  of  Greek  text  do  these 
fragments  bear  witness? 

(a)  The  number  of  Palestinian  forms,  and  of  words  common  to  our 
text  and  Adler's  MS.,  demonstrate  that  the  fragments  now  edited,  and 
those  which  were  known  before,  are  all  parts  of  one  vernacular  version, 
although,  as  we  said  on  the  preceding  page,  there  is  no  evidence  to 
show  whether  the  separate  books  were  translated  at  one  time,  or  at 
intervals,  and  whether,  or  not,  any  revisions  took  place. 

(/3)  To  afford  materials  for  an  answer  to  the  second  question,  we  have 
set  out  in  parallel  columns  a  passage  in  the  three  forms  of  the  Peshitto, 
the  Harclean,  and  our  MS.      No   one  who   pursues   the   comparison 

* '  Psalmos  e  versione  Graeca  LXX.  Interpretum  translates  esse,  jam  e  nameris  quibus  inscripti 
sunt  didiceram ; '  Land,  op.  cit,  IV,  p.  190.    See  also  our  note  on  p.  xxix. 


INTRODUCTION.  xiii 

throughout  the  fragments  can  doubt  that  they  show  abundant  signs 
of  being  an  independent  translation  from  the  Greek.  The  divergences 
from  the  Peshitto  are  not  like  those  of  the  Harclean,  which  are  due 
to  the  attempt  to  force  the  older  Syriac  into  a  resemblance  to  the  Greek. 
The  differences  between  the  text  of  our  fragments  and  the  Peshitto, 
or  the  Harclean,  are  altogether  such  as  would  be  found  in  a  version 
made  at  a  different  epoch,  amid  other  surroundings,  by  other  hands. 

(y)  On  the  assumption  that  our  fragments  are  parts  of  the  version 
of  which  Adler's  MS.  represents  the  Gospels,  it  may  be  supposed  that 
a  similar  type  of  Greek  text  underlies  them  all.  It  has  usually  been 
held  that  the  'Jerusalem  Syriac'  bears  witness,  for  the  most  part,  to 
the  readings  of  the  oldest  uncials  and  those  cursives  which  agree  with 
them  ^ ;  but  it  is  not  true  that  it  lends  a  constant  support  to  what  has 
been  called  the  Pre-Syrian,  or  Neutral,  type  of  text.  An  inspection  of 
the  Delectus  Lectionum,  which  Professor  Sanday  has  set  out,  with  much 
clearness,  in  his  excellent  Appendix"^,  will  show  that  the  Versio  Hierosoly- 
mitana,  as  often  as  not,  sides  with  the  Peshitto  against  the  reading  of  the 
codex  Vaticanus.  A  complete  solution  of  the  problem  must  be  left  to  the 
student  who  will  institute  an  exhaustive  examination  of  the  occasion  of 
every  word  and  phrase  in  the  N.  T.  Palestinian  Syriac.  Our  Notes 
suggest  the  answer,  which  may  ultimately  be  given.  It  will  be  seen  from 
them  that  while  some  of  the  readings  of  recent  editors,  and  of  cod.  B, 
in  the  Pauline  Epistles,  are  supported,  others  are  not.  Our  translation, 
which  occupies  an  independent  position  as  a  Syriac  Version,  bears  also 
an  independent  witness  to  a  class  of  Greek  documents,  which  exhibited  a 
form  of  text,  in  part  eclectic,  in  part  distinguished  by  peculiar  readings. 

The  friends  who  are  named  in  these  pages,  and  others,  have  helped 
me  by  many  suggestions,  which  I  have  gladly  adopted,  but  without 
thereby  holding  them  responsible  for  any  of  the  critical  opinions  expressed 
in  the  course  of  the  work. 

*  Adler's  words  are : — '  Ostendimus,  earn  [sc.  Vers.  Hier.']  antiquissimis  auctoritatibus 
suffragari,  perantiquos  codices,  Vaticanum  et  Cantabrigiensem  plerumque  sequi,  Patribus  quoqne, 
Origeni,  Chrysostomo,  aliis,  non  raro  adstipulari.'  Verss.  Syrr.  p.  201 ;  cf.  Scrivener's  Intro- 
duction, Ed.  3,  p.  330. 

To  much  the  same  effect  Miniscalchi  Erizzo,  op.  cit.  II,  p.  xlviii.  So  Land : — '  Quod 
jam  in  Psalmis  observavimus,  versionem  Palaestinam  cum  nullo  Graeco  libro  hodie  superstite 
omnino  conspirare,  idem  et  in  Evangeliis  apparet.'     Op.  cit.  IV,  p.  199. 

*  Nov.  Test.  c.  Tribus  Appendicibus  (Lloyd  et  Sanday),  1889, 


A   COMPARISON   OF    THE  VERSIONS   OF  2   TIMOTHY  I.  11-18 

IN   THE   PESHITTO,  THE   HARCLEAN,  AND   THE 

BODLEIAN   PALESTINIAN   FRAGMENTS. 


PALESTINIAN. 

ootf  -iv*  o  Oft  )j{o   ;]^»i  v\«o> 

)lo.l.v>  .r»->    i^J^o   b.,\.vi  ».» 
.Ilmaa^o  >Jocifn»'»  JI^vAmoo 

o>V. ,..-->  \    ^,  .,rf>-««  «>    );.ao 

^X\m9  >«»fl«*»  )«^D  0»^  tlS» 


HARCLEAN. 

.i^nVaLV?  Ua^jAO  )i>«.»\i»,o 

]^/   ^^«i      4^    i^fl.V?    OCM 


^^..i^^ao      .uaoo»n  9>  «  iy>  » >o{» 

.loo  D  w2^?  )t>\«  «  ■■->0 
;.*kx^  *.  hOOO^d  loot  fO  11/ 
.w*A*.(0  |l^    m^    t>.»l^*ft.» 

... '^  A  )»  )m;^)0  o^  ^lS-i> 
ooo  l-^*:^  LouX  [x\  .»> 
.fiDCLCoslkdw^fljs&ao  '.l^aocu 

^  In  margine  MSti  l'\^<>^  .« 


PESHITTO, 


oot  .*« 

.IxiNcvNy  Uft\.^o  l«>»^^A»o 
.^*^o>|l>/  i,^.fnv>ljo>^^«^Jo 
^^ift  ->  Ui  -*«^*^  )l>/  lo»,d  Ho  5 
U^jya 9  1j/ .£0^.300  .t>,i>n.o> 
»^x^\  ^iNnci^  i«oto«Jiid 
^^  ^«6o«j  .oot  joocuX  M^ 
J^OJAA.;  jl^Nc^^Nt  ILao  jfcu* 
)ocufc30    )loiNn«o»a      --'^  lo 

ll\Nci^  ♦Iw.aV*  ^^QjkAa? 
wO«    WjCLOt   lu*OiA    ,i^    [^ 

.'jfot  U'/  >^*^  .^  li.:^^! 
^A^ot  ^oo»^  uJ.ao  OAdoif 
.yOoM.^  ^ooMl^if  .'JLAdolof  15 

"^  '  '  -   *"*~"     J3D a \i^a.a 
o>l^«^'^    Ua**'9    ypo  '^V<ij 

wyoioi?  ll^>t.i>A">o   ,u,iu.*j( 
]U    ^     ^1    11/     .lo^    1)2° 
)lq.^-»  9>.«fc~>      :  wooooii^ 

^^«J  .>«  I  Mi.nA.lo  .'  <«  l\T> 
liSCl  00       .00»       )0CCLaJ»       yiJ^ 

:  >floci,m  ^Jl3      u  ,.I   ■  NTi.a.f  25 
«]^/  >»^«^  l^i;^]^ 


COMPARISON  OF  THE    THREE  VERSIONS.         xv 

We  have  selected  this  passage  for  comparison  in  the  three  versions, 
because  it  is  one  where  the  Palestinian  text  can  be  exhibited  with 
certainty.  The  reader  can  judge  for  himself  from  the  photograph,  which 
includes  11. 1-2 1.  Every  word  is  legible,  though  some  of  the  points  are 
doubtful,  or  have  been  altogether  effaced.  The  Harclean  is  printed  from 
Wkite'^,  the  Peshitto  from  the  usual  text,  without  regard  to  variants,  for 
they  would  not  affect  the  general  relation  of  the  Peshitto  to  the  Harclean 
and  the  Palestinian.  The  passage  represents  somewhat  more  than 
one-sixteenth  of  the  text  in  our  fragments,  and  suffices  to  show  the 
fundamental  difference  between  the  Palestinian  and  the  Old  Syriac^ 
and  its  Harclean  revision.  The  difference  is  not  merely  that  of  dialect — 
changes  of  forms  and  words  to  adapt  the  text  to  the  vernacular  of  a 
district — it  is  much  wider.  The  Harclean,  though  often  divergent  from 
the  Peshitto,  is  evidently  based  upon  it.  The  Palestinian  differs  from 
both,  sentence  by  sentence.  Such  agreement  as  exists  appears  to  be 
accidental,  and  due  to  the  identity  of  the  underlying  Greek  in  those 
places.  Even  this  short  passage  contains  three  various  readings : — 
1.  3,  iOv&v  omitted,  which  Har.  and  Pesh.  have ;  1.  1 7,  '  and  another 
Hermogenes;'  1.  24,  'with  Him'  for  'with  our''  [Pesh.]  'with  the^ 
[Hard]  ^Lord."*  It  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  the  Palestinian,  whether 
older  or  younger  than  the  Peshitto,  is  independent  of  it,  at  least  in 
the  Pauline  Epistles,  and  represents  a  different  form  of  Greek  text. 

'  N.  T.  Vers.  Syr.  Philoxeniana  [Heracleensis]  c.  Interp.  et  Annott.  Josephi  White. 

*  The  reader  is  aware  that  Dr.  Hort  and  others  have  applied  this  name  to  the  Curetonian. 
That  the  Curetonian  preceded  the  Peshitto  is  only  an  opinion.  In  Studia  Biblica  III  I  have 
shov/n  that  the  latter  bears  no  traces  of  being  a  revision  of  the  former.  If  the  Syriac  Tetraevan- 
^lium  is  really  based  on  an  older  translation,  yet  without  doubt  it  was  brought  into  its  present 
form  at  a  very  remote  period ;  and  the  same  is  true  of  the  other  parts  of  the  Peshitto  N.  T.,  the 
Apostolos,  the  Praxis,  and  the  Three  Catholic  Epistles,  In  the  present  state  of  our  information 
about  the  history  of  the  Peshitto,  the  assertion  often  made  that  '  it  was  revised  in  the  fourth 
century,'  is  possibly  incorrect,  and  certainly  premature. 

While  these  pages  are  passing  through  the  press,  the  discovery  is  announced  of  another 
'  Curetonian  MS.,'  said  to  contain  an  almost  complete  text.  We  are  curious  to  know  if  this  fresh 
witness  can  give  further  evidence  about  the  relation  of  the  Curetonian  to  the  Peshitto* 


THE   REMAINS   OF  THE   PALESTINIAN   VERSION 
OF  THE   HOLY   SCRIPTURES. 

The  largest  and  most  important  portion  of  these  remains  is  that 
which  has  been  longest  known  to  scholars,  the  Evangelistarium  in  the 
Vatican  Library,  which  was  described  by  Adler  in  his  Versiones  Syriacae, 
published  in  the  year  1789.  Smaller  portions  have  been  found  amongst 
the  Nitrian  MSS.,  which  were  acquired  by  the  British  Museum  between 
the  years  1838  and  1864.  Other  fragments  have  been  brought  from  the 
East  by  Tischendorf,  and  are  now  in  the  Imperial  Library,  St.  Peters- 
burg. Another  small  fragment  was  discovered  in  1889  by  Mr.  J. 
Rendel  Harris,  amongst  the  MSS.  in  the  library  of  the  Convent  of 
St.  Catharine,  on  Mount  Sinai.  To  these  we  can  now  add  the  five  frag- 
ments which  are  described  in  this  Anecdoton.  In  all,  the  extant  portions 
of  the  Palestinian  Version  are  as  follows  : — 

Numbers  iv.  46,  47  ;  49 — v.  2 ;  3,  4 ;  6-8. 

[Bodleian  Library,  Oxford— perhaps  eighth  cent.] 

Deuteronomy  vi.  4-16 ;  vii.  35,  26 ;  xiii.  6-17. 

[Imperial  Library,  St.  Petersburg— seventh  or  eighth  cent.] 

Psalms  xliii.  12-27  (Heb.  xliv.  11-26);  xliv  (Heb.  xlv) ;  xlv  (Heb. 
xlvi);  xlvi  (Heb.  xlvii) ;  xlviii.  15  (Heb.  xlix.  i4)-end  ;  xlix  (Heb.  1). 
1-9 ;  Iv.  7  (Heb.  Ivi.  8)-end ;  Ivi.  1-7  (Heb.  Ivii.  1-8) ;  Ixxvii  (Heb. 
Ixxviii).  52-65;  Ixxxi  (Heb.  Ixxxii) ;  Ixxxii  (Heb.  Ixxxiii).  i-io; 
Ixxxix  (Heb.  xc) ;  xc  (Heb.  xci).  1-12. 

[British  Museum,  Add.  14,664,  foil.  22-29— tenth  or  eleventh  cent.] 

Proverbs  ix.  i-ii. 

Isaiah  xi.  6-10 ;  xiv.  28-32  ;  xv.  1-5  ;  xl.  1-8 ;  9-12. 

Job  xxi.  1-9. 

[Imperial  Library,  St.  Petersburg — seventh  or  eighth  cent.] 


REMAINS   OF  PALESTINIAN    VERSION.  xvii 

The  Four  Gospels.  The  whole,  or  a  part,  of  nearly  every  chapter 
of  each  of  the  Evangelists  is  represented ;  there  being  in  all  about 
two-thirds  of  the  text  of  the  Gospels.  Indexes  of  chapters  and  verses 
are  given  in  Land,  pp.  178,  179,  194-197,  and  in  Miniscalchi  Erizzo, 
pp.  51-89. 

[The  British  Museum  (Add.  14,450,  fol.  14 — ? seventh  cent;  14,664, 
foil.  17,  20,  ai — tenth  or  eleventh  cent.),  The  Vatican — A.D.  1030, 
The  Imperial  Library,  St.  Petersburg — ?  seventh  cent.] 

Acts  xiv.  6-13,  in  a  hand  of  uncertain,  but  not  very  early,  date. 
[The  Imperial  Library,  St.  Petersburg.] 

The  Pauline  Epistles. 

Galatians.  Eleven  verses,  or  part  of  verses,  viz.  ii.  3-5,  13-14  ;  iii. 
17,  18,  24-28. 

[Mount  Sinai — perhaps  eighth  cent] 

COLOSSIANS  iv.  12-18. 

1  Thessalonians  i.  1-3 ;  iv.  3-15. 

2  Timothy  i.  10 — ii.  7. 
Titus  i.  11 — ii.  8. 

[Bodleian  Library — seventh  or  eighth  cent] 

The  London  and  St.  Petersburg  texts,  which  are  all  fragmentary, 
have  been  published  by  Professor  Land  in  Anecdota  Syriaca,  torn,  iv, 
1875.     From  this  volume  the  references  given  above  are  taken. 

The  Vatican  Evangelistarium  was  edited  in  sumptuous  style  by  Count 
F.  Miniscalchi  Erizzo,  in  the  work  entitled  Evangeliarium  Hierosolymi- 
tanum,  1 861-1 864. 

The  Sinaitic  leaf  has  been  printed  by  Mr.  J.  Rendel  Harris  in  Biblical 
Fragments  from  Mount  Sinai,  1890. 
The  reader  may  also  consult : — 
Adler's  Versiones  Syriacae. 

Davidson  on  the  Syriac  Versions  in  Kitto's  Cyclopaedia  of  Biblical  Litera- 
ture, 3rd  ed.,  1866. 
Duval,  Traits  de  Grammaire  Syriaque,  11.  cc.  (p.  v  sup.)  and  §  11. 
Kautzsch,  Grammatik  des  Biblisck-Aramaischen,  §  5.  9. 

c  [II.  5.] 


xviii         REMAINS   OF  PALESTINIAN    VERSION 

Tischendorf  s  Notitia  ed.  cod.  Bill.  SinaUici,  i860,  p.  49,  and  Anecdota  Sacra 

et  Prof  ana,  1861,  p.  xi  and  p.  13. 
Wright's  Article,  Syriac  Literature,  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  xxii,  pp.  825, 

826. 
Zahn's  Forschungen,  i  Theil,  1881,  pp.  329-350. 

The  late  Dr.  P.  A.  de  Lagarde  made  a  fresh  collation  of  the  Vatican 
Evangelistarium,  with  the  intention  of  bringing  out  a  new  edition, 
which  has  been  recently  published  in  a  posthumous  work  entitled  Bihlio- 
thecae  Syriacae  a  Paulo  de  Lagarde  collectae.  Pages  258-4o:z  contain  the 
Evangeliarium  Hierosolymitamim.  The  text  is  set  out  in  the  order  of 
the  Gospels,  instead  of  that  of  the  Church  Lessons,  and  notes  are 
appended  on  the  readings  of  the  MS.  and  its  correctors,  and  the  edition 
of  Miniscalchi  Erizzo. 

The  portions  included  in  the  above  list,  though  none  are  complete 
books,  and  some  contain  but  a  few  verses,  yet,  when  taken  together,  are 
evidence  for  the  existence  of  a  large  part  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  in  the 
Palestinian  Version.  They  do  not,  of  course,  amount  to  a  proof  that  the 
whole  Bible  was  translated  into  this  dialect,  nor  do  they  suffice  to 
determine  what  was  the  Canon  of  such  a  translation,  if  it  ever  was  made. 
The  Gospel  portions  belong  to  Service  Books,  and  so  do  the  O.  T. 
portions,  and  the  fragment  from  Acts,  in  the  judgment  of  Dr.  Land^ 
Our  own  fragment  from  Numbers  bears  no  indication  of  its  origin.  But 
it  is  to  be  remembered  that  Lesson  Books  do  not  belong  to  the  earliest 
periods  of  transcription.  MSS.  were  marked  for  the  Lessons  long  before 
separate  copies  were  made  for  use  in  the  Church.  It  is  probable  that 
the  Syro-Palestinian  dialect  was  the  vernacular  of  some  of  the  earliest 
Christian  bodies,  and  analogy  leads  to  the  almost  certain  conclusion 
that  these  early  converts  possessed  copies  of  the  Scriptures  in  their 
vernacular  for  some  time  before  they  arranged  those  Scriptures  in 
separate  books  for  use  in  the  Church  services.  Our  oldest  fragments 
appear  to  date  from  the  eighth  century  at  leasts     To  that  era  belongs 

'  He  considers  that  all  the  London  and  St.  Petersburg  fragments  are  parts  of  Service  Books, 
with  one  exception,  the  fol.  55  of  the  St.  Petersburg  volume;  and  of  this  he  writes  thus:— 'fol. 
56  non  rescriptum.  Videtur  e  Diatessaro  nescio  quo  petitum  esse,'  op.  cit.  p.  188.  '  Attamen  de 
hujus  libri  ratione  e  fragmentis  nostris  judicare  non  licet,'  p.  205. 

*  Mr.  Rendel  Harris  says  of  his  leaf,  'Perhaps  we  shall  not  be  far  wrong  in  referring  it  to  the 
eighth  century,'  op.  cit.  p.  xiv. 


OF   THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES.  xix 

the  commencement  of  the  composition  of  Church  Lesson  Books ^.  There 
is  no  proof  that  the  Syro-Palestinian  Lectionaries  are  translations  from 
Greek  Lectionaries ;  and  it  may  be  regarded  as  certain  that  they  were 
preceded  by  complete  copies  of  the  Gospels,  the  Acts,  and  the  Pauline 
Epistles,  and  of  part,  if  not  of  the  whole  of  the  Old  Testament.  The 
Bodleian  N.  T.  fragments  appear  to  have  belonged  to  such  a  complete 
copy,  and  perhaps  the  Sinaitic  leaf  also.  The  colophon  appended  to 
Colossians  (see  p.  lo)  indicates  a  transcript  of  something  more  than  a 
Set  of  Lessons ;  and  this  is  not  contradicted  by  the  Rubric  inserted  in 
the  text  of  i  Thessalojiians  iv,  for  Rubrics  were  often  interpolated  by 
Syriac  scribes  into  copies  of  the  complete  text  ^. 

'  '  None  [of  the  books  of  Ecclesiastical  Lessons]  are  believed  to  be  older  than  the  eighth  or 
possibly  the  ninth  century.'     Westcott  and  Hort,  Introduction,  p.  76. 

*  Examples  are: — Add.  Mus.  Brit.  14,470,  a  Peshitto  Tetraevangelium  of  the  fifth  or  sixth 
cent.;  the  Tetraevangelium  Add.  14,455,  sixth  cent.;  the  Nestorian  Tetraevangelium  Add.  1 7, 1 1 4, 
sixth  or  seventh  cent.;  the  Apostolos  Add.  17,122.  Many  MSS.,  if  not  most,  have  some  Lessons, 
perhaps  those  which  were  most  important,  indicated  in  the  text,  although  only  a  few  copies  are 
rubricated  throughout. 


c  a 


THE    TYPE     OF     GREEK     TEXT     SUPPORTED     BY     THE 

SYRIAC   OF  THE   FOUR   FRAGMENTS   OF 

THE   PAULINE   EPISTLES. 


[Mr.  E.  N.  Bennett,  Fellow  of  Hertford  College,  has  very  kindly  assisted  me  in  comparing 
the  readings  of  the  Palestinian  fragments  of  the  Pauline  Epistles  with  the  Greek  text.  The 
following  section  has  been  written  by  him  as  a  convenient  summary  of  the  results  of  our  obser- 
vations. It  will  be  seen  that  Mr.  Bennett's  remarks  tend  to  confirm  the  opinions  which  we  have 
already  expressed*  on  the  character  of  the  translation,  and  on  the  type  of  Greek  text  from  which 
it  was  made.] 

As  the  four  fragments  before  us  cover  less  than  sixty  verses,  it  is  impossible  to 
draw  from  them  any  very  decided  inferences  as  to  the  nature  of  the  Greek  text 
underlying  the  Palestinian  version  of  the  Pauline  Epistles.  But  the  following 
collation,  which,  I  fear,  must  necessarily  be  imperfect,  seems  to  fully  confirm  the 
view  already  taken  by  Westcott  and  Hort  and  others,  that  the  Palestinian  contains 
a  text  entirely  different  from  the  other  Syriac  versions.  Even  in  the  few  verses 
before  us  the  variety  of  reading  is  surprising  and  Land's  verdict  holds  good — 
*  Versionem  Palaestinam  cum  nullo  Graeco  libro  hodie  superstite  omnino  conspirare.' 
The  Greek  text  used  by  the  translator  must  have  been  a  curious  intermixture  of 
Western  and  other  types.  The  Syriac  favours  N  against  B  twice,  and  B  against  N 
three  times.  The  combination  nB  is  followed  five  times  and  in  four  cases  deserted. 
The  text  harmonizes  with  the  Peshitto  in  opposition  to  the  Harclean  some  seven 
times,  though  the  reverse  is  less  common;  it  sometimes  sides  with  both  these 
versions  against  the  Greek  MSS.,  and  sometimes  opposes  them.  Tischendorf's 
view,  that  the  Palestinian  text  resembles  most  closely  that  of  B  and  D,  is  scarcely 
corroborated  by  the  present  fragments,  which  agree  with  the  combination  three 
times,  and  diverge  from  it  twice, — though,  as  remarked  above,  our  data  in  the 
present  instance  are  too  scanty  to  supply  any  definite  conclusion  on  this  point. 

'  See  Introduction,  §  7  (2)  ;  also  pp.  xiv,  xv. 


THE   TYPE   OF  GREEK    TEXT.  xxi 

In  general  the  version  is  corrects  and  in  only  two  places  has  the  translator 
seriously  missed  the  sense  of  his  original,  viz.  in  i  Thess.  iv.  lo-ii  and  Titus  ii.  7. 
In  the  first  of  these  passages  the  author  of  the  version  has  evidently  been  puzzled 
by  the  phrase  <f)i\oTifit'i<TOai  fjo-vxdCfiv.  He  has  translated  the  Greek  as  if  there  were 
a  Kai  between  the  two  verbs,  has  transposed  the  order  of  irepiaafveiv  and  ^iXoTt- 
fjifiadai  and  taken  the  latter  to  mean  *  render  honour,'  or  perhaps  '  increase,'  for  the 
Syriac  is  doubtful.  In  the  second  passage  d(f>6opiav  is  translated  as  if  it  were  an 
adjective  agreeing  with  8i8aaKdKia,  but  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  )tGwua«o»d^  has 
been  made  to  correspond  to  a-ffivorrjTa. 

Amongst  minor  mistakes  are  Otov  dbivai  turned  by  'to  see  God'  in  Titus  i.  16, 
and  in  ii.  7  of  the  same  Epistle  irtpi  irdvra  rendered  as  if  it  were  nepl  ndm-av.  In 
Col.  iv.  15  the  Syriac  has  kept  the  masculine  form  NvfjL<j)ds,  while  it  follows  B 
and  Hard,  text  in  reading  avrrjs  (the  second  hand  of  B  accentuates  Nu/x^ay). 
The  omission  of  6  dyanrjTos  in  Col.  iv.  14,  and  the  reading  rfjv  iv  Aao8iiceiq  (ver.  16), 
are  almost  unique  ;  there  is  no  other  authority,  as  far  as  I  know,  for  the  absence 
of  0X.J7  in  I  Thess.  iv.  10. 

At  the  end  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  we  find  the  common  form  of  the 
subscription — iypd<^r)  dn6  'Pwprjs  8ia  TvxKov  Kai  Ovrjcrifiov — preceded  by  a  clause 
found  in  D  and  a  few  other  MSS. 

The  question  of  the  Greek  text  which  underlies  so  ancient  a  version  as  the 
one  before  us  is  full  of  interest,  and  we  may  hope  that  its  fuller  solution  will  be 
facilitated  before  long,  by  the  acquisition  of  fresh  materials.  I  have  been  informed 
by  Mr.  J.  Rendel  Harris,  that  a  considerable  number  of  Palestinian  fragments 
exist  on  Mount  Sinai,  and  the  examination  of  these  would  doubtless  throw  fresh 
light  on  the  subject. 

The  following  notes  are  based  mainly  on  the  text  of  Tregelles,  but  the 
references  to  the  Peshitto  and  the  Harclean  have  been  verified  in  Leusden  and 
Schaa/ znd.  in  White. 

COLOSSIANS  IV.    12-18. 

iv.  12.  'lijcroO  with  nABC  [against  D  Pesh.  Hard]  ' 

nfirXrjpaufvoi  with  Pesh.  Hard,  text  [against  N  A  B  C  D  Hard,  marg.] 

'  Cp.  Land,  Anecd.  Syr.  iv.  197,  versionem  Palaestinam  ab  hominibus  baud  indoctis  ad  varios 
Graecos  libros  emendatam  et  immutato  sermonis  usui  accommodatam  esse. 


xxii  THE    TYPE   OF  GREEK    TEXT 

13.  irovov  (ut  vid.,  see  note  below^)  with  nABC  [against  Pesh.  and  Hard. 

(f^Xoi/)  D  (kottov)]. 

14.  omits  6  ayai:j]T6s  with  1 7. 

15.  avn\i  with  B  Hard,  text  [against  N  A  C  {mirav)  D  Pesh.  Hard.  marg. 

16.  Tr\v  €u  \ao8iKeia  with  FG  (?)  g  eam  quae  in  laodo  t  ae  cia  est. 

omits  (ut  vid.)  Kai  before  ifiels  with  D,  but  seems  to  insert  Kai  before 

18.  omits  dn})v  with  K  ABC  [against  D  Pesh.  Hard.] 

I    THESSALONIANS  I.   1-3,   IV.   3-15. 

i.    I .  adds  (after  elp^mj)  dir6  deov  narphs  ^fiStv  koI  Kvplov  'lijcrou  Xpurrov  with  N  A  C, 
Hard,  text  c.  aster,  [against  B  Pesh.  Hard.] 
omits  Kai  (before  first  irarpi)  [against  Hard.] 

2.  adds  vpS)p  (after  p.vfiav)  with  C  D  Pesh.  Hard,  [against  N  A  B]. 

3.  Tov  tpyov  T^9  TTt'oTcwf  vpS)v  with  D  Pcsh.  Harcl.  [against  K  A  B  vfimv  rov  ifyy. 

TTIS  TTt'o-r.] 

iv.  3.  TTji  (before  Tvopvdas)  ut  vid.,  see  note  below''. 

4.  iv  Ttpfj  Koi  dyiao-p^  (ut  vid.) 

7.  ipas  with  Pesh. 

8.  omits  rat  (before  86vra)  with  A  B  Pesh.  [against  N  D  Hard.] 
ipds  with  N  B  D  Pesh.  Harcl.  marg.  [against  A  Harcl.  text]. 

9.  fxtTf  with  N  A  Pesh.  [against  B  D  Hard.] 
lo.  omits  oX?7- 

'  The  text  has  .A'GuOO,  which  I  take  to  be  a  Palest,  noun  of  the  form  Dipn  (ttjin  =  TD«n); 
see  notes  on  i  Thess.  iv.  5  and  2  Tim.  ii.  3.  Buxtorf  (col.  845)  cites  a  form  iDin'O  dolor,  and 
this  (or  euro)  is  the  meaning  of  the  Neo-Syr.  \jlL  (Stoddard  in  Thes.  Syr.  1393).  The  root 
occurs  several  times  in  Hier.  in  the  sense  of  suffer,  endure — e.  g.  for  naOovaa  Mark  v.  26,  ifaBiiv 
Luke  xxiv.  26,  [wokcSs]  jTa<rx*«  Mat.  xvii.  15.  No  doubt  o^cuiJiO  connotes  many  forms  of  mental 
affection,  like  the  word  JL*.**,  which  Pesh.  has  in  i  Thess.  iv.  5,  although  at  Col.  iv.  13  it  uses 
IXL^.  As  Palest,  has  a.cuoo  in  both  places,  I  am  inclined  to  think  they  read  itdvo^  at  Col.  iv. 
13,  and  took  it  in  the  sense  of  the  v6lBos  of  i  Thess.  iv.  5.  It  is,  I  suppose,  conceivable  that  they 
even  had  vaQos  in  the  text  of  Colossians. — G.  H.  G. 

*  Each  of  the  three  {Pesh.,  Hard.,  Palest^  has  the  definite  form  )i_;  but  then  (see  Duval, 
Gram.  Syr.  §  299)  this  form  in  Syriac  does  not  always  indicate  what  would  be  in  Greek  or 
English,  a  noun  with  the  definite  article.  Still  we  find  that  at  2  Tim.  i.  11,  where  the  nouns  are 
clearly  indefinite,  the  definite  forms  are  not  used,  but  lOiD,  --A*-;  ■o>N'^ — G.  H.  G. 


SUPPORTED  BY  THE   SYRIAC.  xxiii 

II.  omits  lUaii  (ut  vid.)  with  B  D  [against  N  A]. 
omits  Kal  (before  v\uv)  [against  Hard.] 

13.  6(\ofifv  with  N  ABD  [against  Pesh.  Hard.] 
KeKoifirjfifvap  (ut  vid.)  with  D  [against  N  A  B  Pesh.  Hard.] 

14.  Koi  6  6f6s  (ut  vid.)  with  Pesh.  [against  B  Hard.] 

2    TIMOTHY  I.  10—//.  7. 

i.  II.  omits  iBvmv  with  N  A  [against  C  D  Pesh.  Hard.] 
16.  6  Kvpios  eXeos  with  Pesh.  Hard. 
18.  adds  not  (after  BirjKovrjafv)  with  Pesh.  Hard, 
ii.  3.  (TvyKaKOTTaOijaov  (ut  vid.)  with  nACD  Hard.  marg.  [against  Pesh.  Hard. 
text]. 
7.  o  (before  Xeya)  with  N  A  C  Pesh.  [against  D  Hard.] 

TITC/S  I.  II— II.  8. 

ii.  3.  Upoirpfm'i  with  C  Pesh.  Hard,  [against  N  A  D  Hard,  marg.] 
fifi  oiva  with  D  Pesh.  Hard,  [against  nAC]. 
5.  oiKovpyovs  (ut  vid.)  with  ^5  A  C  D  [against  Hard,  marg.] 
omits  (after  6(ov)  koI  fj  SiBaaKoiKia  [against  C  Hard.] 

E.  N.  B. 


LIST   OF    PALESTINIAN   AND    OTHER   WORDS 
AND   FORMS. 


The  Syro-Palestinian  dialect  contains : — (a)  Many  Chaldee  words  and  forms, 
some  Hebrew  words,  and  a  few  adapted  from  Arabic  and  Greek.  (/3)  Grammatical 
forms,  nearly  all  of  which  are  also  Chaldaic.  (y)  Roots  used  in  a  sense  not 
common  in  ordinary  Syriac.  (S)  Some  terms,  and  forms  of  words,  which  appear 
to  be  exclusively  Palestinian. 

Most  of  the  Palestinian  words  in  the  following  list  are  included  in  the  lists 
in  Land  and  Miniscalchi  Erizzo,  Their  lists,  in  conjunction  with  ours,  will  supply 
an  interesting  specimen  of  the  Palestinian  vocabulary. 


\ 

^Qs>\  I  Thess.  i.  i. 

?/  Num.  iv.  49.    See  also  note 
on  Tit.  i.  12. 
hftSc^  Tit.  ii.  I,  7. 

yo?  I  Thess.  iv.  8. 
Mjiaaoo/  Col.  iv.  18. 

»so/  Col.  iv.  15,  2  Tim.  i.  12. 
)J1*./  Col.  iv.  15,  etc. 
^-ii«~  V  Num.  iv.  46. 
Ui^/  2  Tim.  ii.  7. 

Ji7  I  Thess.  i.  2,  etc. ;  and  see 
note  on  i.  2. 
^**j»^  I  Thess.  iv.  6. 

iia^  2  Tim.  i.  16. 

JLfio^y/  2  Tim.  ii.  6. 

jai^U  2  Tim.  ii.  5. 

ycuuscl/  Num.  iv.  49. 

V„»>v>.<Y>l/  2  Tim.  i.  II. 

o 
ylo,^  2  Tim.  i.  14. 
IvooQA  2  Tim.  i.  10. 


)l>o»^  Rubric,  p.  14,  1.  20. 
)j^  Num.  V.  7,  8. 
i^  I  Thess.  iv.  14,  etc. 
f  t^  Tit.  ii.  7. 

? 
lU^^ooo?  2  Tim.  ii.  2. 
»*?  Tit.  ii.  7. 
yOiSf  I  Thess.  i.  2. 
.?  2  Tim.  ii.  i,  4. 

o» 
k*o»=«  Col.  iv.  16. 
i^o«  I  Thess.  iv.  10. 
.?o»  Tit.  ii.  8. 

loot  for  ojot,  I  Thess.  iv.  8. 
yOe»«.=  ^o»*  Tit.  ii.  4,  5. 

.^ot   I  Thess.  iv.  5. 
h^  -'  NfN>~  2  Tim.  i.  12. 
.so*  Num.  iv.  49. 
\jAoot  Num.  iv.  49,  V.  4. 
^01  Tit.  i.  14. 


LIST  OF  WORDS  AND  FORMS. 


XXV 


Uojf  I  Thess.  iv.  3. 


)V>A«*  I  Thess.  iv.  9,  2  Tim.  i.  13. 
II^Om  I  Thess.  i.  3. 
)j>cu*  2  Tim.  i.  15,  ii.  2. 
okrCLM  2  Tim.  ii.  3. 
](Xmi*  Tit.  i.  12. 
Ij"^'"  2  Tim.  ii.  i. 

yJS&M    Col.  iv,    17. 

U  .  v>i»  Num.  V.  7. 

]*axt^  Col.  iv.  18,  I  Thess.  i.  i. 
j^ifi^mdM  I  Thess.  iv.  12. 
l^l^su;^  Tit.  i.  13. 


ck^— ^  Tit.  ii.  7;   ^t"^^  Col.  iv. 
12,  13;  g:.^*^  I  Thess, 

iv.  9. 
kADoSa^  Tit.  ii.  7. 
jlH^  Tit.  ii.  4. 


«*=^  \n/ut.f  Num.  v,  2,  etc. 
fc.V!i.n*t)u  Tit.  ii.  4. 

]oM  Num.  V,  8;    cf.   i  Thess. 
iv,  4  n. 
ylooM  Tit.  ii.  2. 
yOM  Tit.  ii,  4, 
ioom^   I  Thess,  iv.  6. 
■^^A*  2  Tim.  i.  12. 
.ci°>>J  2  Tim.  ii.  2. 
yCLsM^  Num.  V,  3. 
dooQjau  Col.  iv.  12,  etc.;   see  note, 

p.  XXX. 

yeuaui^  2  Tim.  ii.  4. 


_V»>  Num.  iv.  49,  etc.,  and  see 

Col.  iv,  18  n. 
»k«  2  Tim.  i.  18. 


.»a  Num.  V.  4,  Tit.  i.  13. 

^oa  Num.  iv.  47,  etc. 

ipoXao  I  Thess.  iv.  12. 

)^,v\S.ao  I  Thess.  iv.  5,  11. 

^  Tit.  ii.  3. 

]]^«ji^ad  I  Thess.  i.  i. 

'^♦^lii.  I  Thess.  iv.  6,  13,  Tit.  i.  11. 

)u>l^s^.i^  2  Tim.  i.  12. 


r^j^ 


I  Thess.  i.  3. 

I  Thess,  iv.  14,  2  Tim.  ii.  2. 

Tit.  i.  14. 

Col.  iv.  13, 1  Thess.  iv.  5  n., 

and  p,  xxii,  n.  i. 
Tit.  i.  16. 
I  Thess.  iv.  5. 
I  Thess.  iv,  13, 

1  Thess,  iv,  10. 

2  Tim,  i.  13. 
Tit.  ii.  3. 
Tit.  i.  15. 

2  Tim.  i.  12. 
2  Tim.  ii.  2. 
Col.  iv.  13,        , 
I  Thess,  iv.  13. 
Tit.  ii.  3. 
Tit,  i.  14. 
Tit.  i.  15. 


[H.  5.] 


XXVI 


LIST  OF    WORDS   AND   FORMS. 


>-^\ii>^  Tit. 


11.  3. 


^?o^uoo  I  Thess.  i.  2. 


'^Aj  2  Tim.  ii.  6. 

<s\m  Num.  v.  3. 
»*^  Tit.  ii.  3. 
.>»flo  Tit.  ii.  5. 
)fe>.\a«»  Num.  V.  6,  7. 


)lyi*->v,  2  Tim.  ii.  4. 

*^  Col.  iv.  12,  and  see  i  Thess. 
i.  2  n. 
MO«ACLbw  Num.  iv.  49. 
)^«Acxx  Num.  iv.  47;  cf.  i  Thess.  i.3. 
woN.v.  Col.  iv.  13. 
'^(Xiw  Num.  iv.  47. 
)>*.^.v  2  Tim.  i.  14. 
Ux  I  Thess.  iv.  6,  8. 


A  tnversum  (a)  2  Tim.  i.  12  n. 
)Lv>,9  2  Tim.  ii.  6. 
|i>j*i>\a  Num.  iv.  47. 
^^*a»3  Tit.  i.  16. 
)uo«j^  2  Tim.  i.  12,  14. 

JLigus.  Col.  iv.  12. 


r^'j 


I  Thess.  iv.  12. 


uw«i3  I  Thess.  iv.  4. 
)l^cu9  Tit.  i.  14. 
w)oQj9  2  Tim.  ii.  6. 
ocunA  Tit.  i.  12  marg. 
yO.\<^o  Rubric,  p.  14, 1.  20. 
woto^  Col.  iv.  16. 
yluya  Rubric,  p.  14,  1.  19. 
^.mus  Tit.  i.  13. 


)-!>,  A» 

2  Tim.  i.  16. 
Num.  iv.  46. 

•Jk 

i,^  Num.  V.  2,  4. 
'^(Lw  Col.  iv.  18,  etc. 

)>.aft.\^. 

Col.  iv.  12,  etc. 

jv^AA,  Tit.  i.  12  marg. 

Jks-^ 

I  Thess.  iv.  13. 

^i^Na, 

I  Thess.  iv.  6. 

)lo«.v>i>, 

Col.  iv.  17. 

lloyiA 

I  Thess.  iv.  7. 

L 

ioL 

2  Tim.  ii.  7. 

I  Thess.  iv.  5. 

lio^l  Tit.  i.  II. 
y^*jl  Rubric,  p.  14,  1.  19. 

CLJdOMfl 

I  Thess.  iv.  3. 

*>l 

2  Tim.  i.  10,  Tit.  ii.  7  n 

NOTES 

ON  THE  VERSES  CONTAINED  IN  THE  FRAGMENTS. 


ABBREVIATIONS. 

Buxt.  =  Job.  Buxtorfii  Lex.  Chald.  Talmud,  et  Rabbin. 

Cast.  —  Edm,  Castelli  Lexicon  Syriacum  ed.  J.  D.  Michaelis. 

Hidr.  =  The  Words  and  Forms  of  the  Evangelistarium  Hierosolymitanum. 

Lagarde  =  Bibliothecae  Syriacae  a  P.  de  Lagarde  collectae,  1892. 

Levy  —  Chaldaisches  Worterbuch  iiber  die  Targnmim,  von  J.  Levy. 

Palest.  =  The  Dialect  of  the  Remains  of  the  Palestinian  Version. 

Sanday  =  Nov.  Test.  Graec.  cum  Appendicibus,  curante  Gul.  Sanday,  1889. 

Schaaf  =  Car,  Schaafii  Lex.  Syr.  Concordantiale. 

Thes.  Syr.  =  Thesaurus  Syriacus  (R.  Payne  Smith),  Fascc.  i-ix,  jj  — <'. 

WH  =  The  New  Testament  in  the  Original  Greek  (Westcott  &  Hort),  1881. 

NUMBERS. 

iv.  46.  Moshe',  Aharon,  the  Ltvije',  Semitic  forms,  as  in  the  Peshitto  (but  there 
)La^  =  L'vijS),  although,  as  will  be  seen  below,  the  Greek  text  has  been  usually 
followed,  while  yet  the  Hebrew  has  not  been  neglected.  In  the  N.  T.  fragments 
we  have  >so^£o^=lr)(Tovs,  instead  of  the  Pesh.  Jeshua. 

)l*jw»]  If  the  noun,  and  not  the  adjective,  it  is  a  Palest,  plural  emph.,  like 
)uoql^  1.  12.  JW9  and  its  derivatives  are  always  written  without  the  ^  in  old  MSS. 
The  scriptio  plena  of  the  next  word  is  a  mark  of  antiquity,  at  least  it  would  be  in 
a  Pesh.  manuscript ;   but  it  occurs  in  printed  editions. 

of  Israil]  The  Rom.  reading,  Alex,  has  vliiiv  'la-pariX. 

numbered]  No  doubt  some  part  of  \±ic  preceded ;  LXX.  eVfo-Mi/^oTo,  as  ver.  49 
€jre(TK€Trr}a-av,  where  we  have  yOi.'^Uo  and  they  were  numbered, 

■)ua*^^]  Final  \  in  our  text  is  sometimes  thus  furnished  with  a  point,  the  use 
of  which  appears  to  be  somewhat  arbitrary.  Here  it  may  be  a  stop,  subordinate 
to  the  (:)  which  follows ;  but  cf.  'Ju-o:*),  and  note  on  ver.  49. 

1.  5.  5/  is  the  word  oxko^ ;  perhaps  there  was  a  reading  eV  t.  S^Xotp.  LXX. 
now  Kara  brjixovs  Kal  with  Pesh.  and  ffed. 

d  2 


xxviu  NOTES  ON   THE    VERSES 

1.  6.  ioo»-.]  The  (:),  which  is  not  distinct  in  the  collotype,  seems  to  be  thus 
placed  for  want  of  room. 

47.  twenty- five  years]  So  LXX,  but  Heb.  and  Pesh.  thirty. 

unto  the  works  .  .  .1  Like  irpos  t6  tpyov  t5>v  tpyav  koL  to.  fpya  ra  aipofitva,  rather 
than  the  Hebrew. 

"^►^v]  C/iaid.  and  Palest,  form  of  participle. 

)u«jda^  Palest.,  see  Thes.  Syr.  2779 — with  Palest,  suffix,  ver.  49, 1.  3. 

f.i::\o.]  Apparently  a  Palestinian  form;  cf.  Neo-Syr.  Yi^'h.  \x*^<i»  is  used 
in  Pesh.  (Num.  iii.  26,  31)  of  the  holy  vessels  and  instruments.  Perhaps  ?pya  was 
taken  here  in  the  same  sense. 

49.  _^-.  with  suffix,  for  _^  with  suffix;  frequent  in  Hier.^  and  in  these  fragments. 

^1  for  ^},  as  y^9l^*\l  Mat.  iv.  6  Hier.  in  Thes.  Syr.  1549. 

:'U,_]  Elaya  is  rare  in  these  fragments,  if  it  occurs  at  all ;  we  take  the  point 
on  \  as  diacritical  (as  1.  11 ;  1.  i,  p.  4,  is  defaced)  and  read  (:)  between  the  two 
words.     Again  like  LXX.  eVi  tSk  tpyav  avrwp  koi  eVl  S)v  alpovaiv  avroi,  km.  (TTta-KfTTrja-ap. 

.ojL»l/]  Thus  clearly  in  the  MS.,  with  the  rare  archaic  ^{Duval,  §  180)  and 
w  dropped — cf,  jlaj),  fol.  2  r  a,  1.  3.  So  in  next  word  —oot,  though  ^o»  also 
occurs  in  Hier.,  cf.  Thes.  Syr.  1003. 

The  blank  line  at  the  end  of  the  verse,  which  corresponds  to  the  &  (Parasha= 
Sectio),  seems  to  indicate  that  the  scribe  was  acquainted  with  the  division  of  the 
Hebrew,  although  the  translation  so  often  follows  the  LXX.  The  injury  to  the 
leaf  extends  over  the  next  B  between  ver.  4  and  ver.  5.  There  seems  hardly  room 
for  another  blank  line. 

v.  2.  ^^im-/]  And  so  p.  6,  1.  14;  cf  p.  4, 1.  3.  Such  differences  in  spelling 
are  common,  even  in  carefully  written  Syriac  MSS. 

.o^.^^*]  w  for  J  in  the  future.  Palest,  and  Chald.  i,^  in  Syriac  usually 
{Bernstein  Lexicon)  in  Chaldee  sometimes  {Levy  s.  v.)  means  'to  burn.'  Here  as 
Chald.  ">?.?'  ejicere,  and  Rab.'^yi^  emittere — Buxt.  2327. 

3.  jS]   The  Trapf/x^oXf)  of  the  Pom.  text;   Alex,  avvayayr). 

oUd  Chaldee  for  Syriac  ck*tt  ;  also  in  Hier.,  see  Thes.  Syr.  2542. 
your  camps]  y(ad- ;  so  Pesh. ;  Heb.  and  LXX.  their. 

4.  4»o  (also  ^fO  Thes.  Syr.  1681)  Hier. 

and  sent  them]  retaining  airovs,  which  Alex,  omits. 

6.  The  line  is  partly  illegible,  which  increases  the  difficulty  of  the  construction. 
There  can  be  little  doubt  about  the  last  word,  and  the  form  is  frequent  in  Hier. 
As  regards  the  first,  the  LXX.  having  oa-ns  hv  noirjo-r},  and  the  Heb.  )^V\  we  restore 
»~>v  .,  since  some  part  of  that  verb  must  almost  certainly  have  governed  the  (Z<rf  .'^oa 
Sea.     Thus  we  obtain  a  sentence  which  is  at  least  as  intelligible  as  the  LXX.  text. 


IN   THE  FRAGMENTS.  xxix 

any  offence]  The  tratrav  of  Rom.  text,    ^.oa  as  Col.  iv.  7,  q.  v. 

of  the  sons  of  men]  Following  apparently  the  tS>v  dvdpamlvav  of  LXX,  rather 
than  the  Hei. 

Our  text  omits  *  against  the  Lord,'  as  does  the  LXX,  but  the  translation  seems 
to  follow  bv^  ^yoij  rather  than  Trapi8a>v  iraplbn ;  for  though  the  latter  may  represent 
the  Hebrew  (see  Schleusner  s.  v.),  it  would  hardly  suggest  the  Syriac. 

otl^  is  difficult.  In  its  position  it  ought  to  be  objective ;  but  that,  the  sense 
forbids.  When  used  for  ille,  it  usually  precedes;  see  examples  in  Thes.  Syr. 
1642,  and  cf.  «&^»i9?  ^  o»k»-»  below.  Probably  the  order  is  an  imitation  of  the 
Heb.  and  LXX,  but  the  meaning  is  rather  aurij  than  iKtimj.  Pesh.  is  woi  U&j 
that  soul. 

7.  let  hini]  As  LXX;  Heb.  pi.  (llinm),  but  continues  in  the  singular.  The 
text  also  supports  the  Rom.  inolr^cTf',  Alex,  has  fjixaprtv. 

)jl^]  Ht'er.  in  the  sense  of  '  pay.' 

which  t's  upon  him]  FesA.  '  let  his  sin  return  upon  his  head ; '  both  misunder- 
stood the  IB'Kni  of  the  Heb.     LXX.  t6  Kf(f)d\aiop,  omitting  the  preposition. 
^  -  v^ "  Hi'er.  form.     The  phrase  means  i  +  ^ ;  LXX.  t6  emTrefinrov. 

8.  ]oM  Hi'er. ;  cf.  i  Thess.  iv.  3  n. 

ol»;j3?  ^]  The  LXX.  6  dyxicTrevap,  according  to  the  Rom.  text;  Alex,  omits  6; 
the  Syriac  certainly  favours  the  article.  Fesh.  agrees  with  our  text,  and  both  may 
be  renderings  of  the  Heb.  ?N3  in  its  secondary  sense,  or  they  may  be  taken  from 
the  Greek. 

In  the  eleven  verses  comprised  in  these  two  fragments  we  have  seven  indications 
of  the  influence  of  the  Greek — iv.  47  (two),  ver.  49,  v.  6  (two),  ver.  7  and  ver.  8; 
hvo  of  the  Hebrew — iv.  49,  v.  6 ;  one  of  the  Peshitto — v.  3,  and  apparently  one 
independent  reading  in  iv.  46.  It  is  also  to  be  observed  that  in  the  five  places 
where  the  Roman  text  of  the  LXX.  differs  from  the  Alexandrine,  our  Syriac 
always  sides  with  the  Vatican  copy.  These  results  are  significant,  and  may  be 
held  to  justify  the  assertion^  that  the  translation  was  made  from  the  Greek,  and 
that  too  of  the  Vatican  type,  but  that  the  translator  had  also  some  knowledge  of 
the  form  of  the  Hebrew  text. 


COLOSSIANS. 

iv.  12.   The  preceding  word  was,  of  course,  "^U,,  as  1.  20  inf.     In  this  phrase 
the  form^^.*A,  (cf.  ver.  1 8)  seems  to  have  been  generally  used  by  the  scribe ;  in  a 

'  See  p.  xii,  and  note  on  Num.  iv.  49. 


XXX  NOTES   ON   THE    VERSES 

few  places  we  have  inserted  w  where  the  MS.  is  illegible;  ver.  14  (the  reading 
is  certain)  is  an  exception.     We  have  also  the  form  Jcsoa*.  Tit.  i.  12  marg. 

j^o^as^']  S  for  the  it.  In  the  last  syllable  the  translator  seems  to  have 
read  os ;  but  doubtless  in  his  days  Greek  was  badly  pronounced. 

1.  4.  Jesus]  «fioac&^,  a  transliteration  of 'ijjo-oCf,  which  even  if  followed,  as  here, 
by  the  Semitic  MesMcha,  is  apparently  always  used  in  these  fragments  for  the 
Jeshua  of  the  Peshitto.  It  occurs  frequently,  but  not  always,  in  Hier.,  cf  Thes. 
Syr.  s.v. 

The  translator  had  the  longer  reading.     So  '^pi^rrau  'li/o-oC  in  W  H. 

1.  5.  '^oo]  Cf.  Num.  iv.  4  et pass.    Hier.,  but  common  in  old  Pesh.  MSS. 

«^  in  the  sense  of  iime  is  Hier. 

fioo]  A.  is  clearly  to  be  restored ;  so  in  the  translation  of  St.  Clement  {Thes. 

Syr.  1 861)  we  have  Jk-j^fco  for  ayavia-ufxeda. 

behalf]  «a^,  with  j  "^^j**  and  similar  constructions,  in  Hier. 

^*^[.a9]o  is  certainly  to  be  read,  and,  no  doubt,  represents  ir(7r\T}pa>fxevoi.  The 
rrfn\r]po(f>onTifjLfvoi  of  W  H,  in  the  sense  of  '  fully  assured,'  is  rendered  by  '^.•i*  fo 
know,  or  otherwise  paraphrased,  in  Pesh.  and  Hard.;  cf.  Luke  i.  i,  Rom.  iv.  21. 

jjcud.  (with  o)  Chald.  and  in  Hier. 

13.   fiAfiOLj^,  i^,  wct^bw,  Hier.  forms.     For  the  wO cf.  Num.  iv.  49,  1.  3. 

1. 15.  See  note  on  2  Tim.  ii.  3.  j>,ci«oo  is  apparently  Hier.  for  juui* — intense 
feeling  amounting  to  pain ;  here  anxiety,  but  i  Thess.  iv.  5  in  a  bad  sense  passion. 
Perhaps  our  text  represents  the  reading  of  WH,  and  in  the  very  order,  itoKvv  -novov. 

Jehirapolis]  Pesh.  tfi&A^ ado ;.*(,'  Hard.  t£aj>^adoioM(,  as  )iatti»OM='lf(^o"ai,  Mat. 
i.  5.  <i*^)LfiooJoM='lfpoo'dXv^a  is  quoted  in  Thes.  Syr.  1570.  The  p  is  very  faint, 
but  I  now  incline  to  read  2,  which  the  it  Avould  require.     Cf.  Introd.  p.  vii. 

15,  1.  4.  tfi0)u&^9o.j?o  is  very  indistinct  in  the  MS.,  but  the  reading  (with  «a=^ 
and  u»)L=as  in  last  syllable)  is  hardly  doubtful;  yet  the  name  (see  below)  is  taken 
for  a  woman's. 

^0/  Hier.  It  is  not  scriptio  plena,  like'^ao  ver.  12,  but  is  to  be  pronounced 
Ao/;  see  Thes.  Syr.  80. 

Church]  Here  )l*X,  but  cf.  note  on  i  Thess.  i.  i. 

ofcs.*:^^?]  Not  oXkov  auTWK  (cf.  Sandqy  1 59)  but  (as  W  H  c.  cod.  B)  the  reading 

is  almost  certainly  oiV =  avTrjs.     In  Hier.  (see  Lagarde's  edition  passim)  the 

usual  distinction  between  o»  and  ot  seems  to  be  observed. 

16.  i*o»osja]  Pesh.  o»o|Lo,  the  proper  Syriac  form.  The  masculine  suffix  4*o», 
if  not  an  error,  must  be  Palestinian.     Cf.  Tit.  ii.  4  n.,  .oom==^om- 

in  Ladikija]  It  appears  to  be  certainly  »N.»,  as  though  they  read  t^v  ^i'  Aaob. 
Here  and  in  some  other  places  we  add  the  stop  which  the  sense  requires. 


IN    THE   FRAGMENTS.  xxxi 

17.  iH]  The  a  here  is  faint,  but  hardly  doubtful.  It  is  clear  in  the  last  word 
of  1.  22. 

vv^-^]  Hier.,  and  frequent  in  the  Targums,  see  Buxt.  779. 
)laa^ajk,]  This  form  of  the  word  appears  to  be  Palestinian. 
11.  21,22  seem  more  emphatic  than  the  extant  original,  as  though  t^  x*'P'  ''fi  'W 
Tov  HavKov. 

18.  £^]  For  the  various  uses  of  1^  in  Hier.  see  Thes.  Syr.  1642.  It  serves 
to  rehearse,  or  emphasize,  the  noun,  both  in  the  nominative  and  accusative,  and 
cannot  always  be  represented  in  English.  Sometimes  it  is  equivalent  to  ipse, 
sometimes  to  a  definite  article,  so  that  not  unfrequently  (like  oo»,  »*'o»)  it  is  intended 
as  a  translation  of  6,  rj,  t6.  It  may  represent  what  we  express  by  an  underline, 
'remember  my  bonds.' 

*»>a»o^  Pales f.  pi.  form,  cf.  Luc.  viii.  29  Hier. 

]faut]  As  Ifed.  ^DH,  and  in  sense  of  x«P's>  it  seems  to  be  rare  (cf.  Tkes.  Syr. 
1329),  but  is  preferred  in  Jlzer.,  and  substituted  for  Pesk.  and  Hard.  JIclsl*.^  ; 
it  occurs  in  the  similar  phrase  i  Thess.  i.  i  inf.     See  also  i  Thess.  iv.  12. 

Amen  omitted :  a  slight  indication  of  the  antiquity  of  the  version  and  its  MS. 

Kolosaij^,  or  KulusaijS,  for  there  are  no  indications  of  vowels — see  Introd.  p.  xii. 
The  termination  (and  in  Thesalon.)  by  analogy  of  Syriac  would  be  lije — see  Thes. 
Syr.  3522. 

The  marks  ( •:  :• )  are  given  in  those  places  where  they  are  legible  in  the  MS. 
Perhaps  originally  each  line  of  the  colophon  was  thus  enclosed. 

Onisimos]  So  we  restore  with  Hard,  and  vv.  II.  in  Tisch.  p.  749. 


I  THESSALONIANS. 

Of]  The  MS.  certainly  appears  to  read  >  (of),  and  not  ^  (to)  which  the  sense 
requires.    Unless  it  is  a  mistake,  we  may  render  '  Epistle  which  is  Thessalonians.' 

Thesalonikaij^  (as  above  Kolosaijt)  with  single  s,  for  the  Syrians  did  not  usually 
double  a  letter,  except  in  Hard.,  where  the  Greek  is  imitated.  The  vowel  after 
the  n  is  doubtful;  h.  being  omitted  here  and  below.  We  write  m  with  Pesh. 
LIaJJq^^I:  so  luAl>cL^)^mfiDl  in  Hard. 

i.  I.  congregation]  )^  »  ^  t  ><  Hier.  in  form,  and  the  term  is  specially  (though 
not  exclusively)  applied  to  the  Synagogue,  Pesh.  and  Hard,  have  here  the 
Christian  term  )l»-:^  Church.  The  use  of  the  former  term  seems  to  be  connected 
with  the  Judaeo-Christian  origin  of  these  fragments. 

1,  8.  ^co/  Hier.  suffix,  as  Mat.  vi.  9,  etc. 


xxxii  NOTES   ON   THE    VERSES 

Our  text  recognises  the  airh  Qeov,  k.  t.  X.,  which  the  Editors  omit  with  cod.  B, 
see  Sunday  i6o. 

2.  wjol^j'  in  the  sense  of  gratias  agere  appears  to  be  Hier.,  see  Thes.  Syr. 
1653- 

^}  Chald. ;  also  in  Hier.  (Thes,  Syr.  s.  v.),  but  there  commonly  omV>  cf. 
Rabb.  1JN.  Our  form  is  clearly  marked  with  ribbut^  in  several  places — e.  g. 
Plate  II,  col.  2,  1.  13. 

\^]  The  MS.  certainly  has  the  (•),  which,  if  not  a  mistake,  must  be  a  kind  of 
stop.     *X  in  sense  of  lime  is  Hier. 

So]  MS.  apparently  ^.,  and  we  take  the  tense  2ls  pres. per/.,  *we  have  made.' 
On  the  idiomatic  53",  see  Col.  iv.  18  sup. 

ssf  Hier.)  but  there  spelt  yO*A«?.  The  text  recognises  the  vp.a>v,  which 
WH  reject. 

prayers]  We  add  ribbui,  which  the  sense  seems  to  require,  though  illegible  in 
the  MS.    On  the  use  of  the  plural  sign,  see  note,  p.  xl. 

3.  ^*d«.»]  If  this  is  to  be  referred,  as  in  our  translation,  to  Eihp.,  the  I  is 
absorbed,  Hier.  more,  cf  Thes.  Syr.  898 ;  but  it  may  be  Aph.,  and  then,  perhaps, 
in  the  sense  of  commemorate. 

Ifjdox,  a  point  of  connection  between  this  fragment  and  Num.  iv.  47. 
SZ]  Thes.  Syr.  11 71  gives  Hier.  \\i^^^  for  Syr.  ida«*;  cf  above  yO;A«f  Hier. 
for  our  «o;^^  also  (2  Tim.  i.  18  n.)  Z!L\  and  "Zh.     The  Palest,  spelling  is  arbitrary, 
iv.  3.  ^»l,  with  o  in  penultimate, a  Pa/w/.  form;  seeDuvaljG^raw.^yr.  p.90,n.3. 
1.  3.  Jj]  is  not  quite  distinct:  in  Hier.  we  have  JlcujJ  as  here  in  Pesh. 

4.  We  restore  (1.  4)  e»  and  (1.  6)  )  as  the  lacunae  require.  Both  the  longer 
jooM  and  the  shorter  )om  occur  in  Hier. 

.A.4J3]  Palest.,  the  Heb.  BHp,  the  Syriac  forms  being  aO{U»  and  U.;gu9,  see 
Schaaf  \<)(i. 

5.  jkQ.Mk>»  and  [fojA^L]  Apparently  Palest.',  )lci  ».«>.»  (passio)  is  quoted  in 
Thes.  Syr.  1393  from  Mar  Ephr. ;  see  also  2  Tim.  ii.  3  n.  and  p.  xxii.  n.  i ;  l«^ocu*l 
and  )1?q.x\mI  occur  in  Hier.,  the  root  is  not  Syr. 

«^«]  Hier.  and  Chald. 

IuoIm  in  sense  of  Gentiles  often  in  Hier. ;  cf.  Talm.  ptD  a  heretic.  Levy  s.v. 

6.  1.  16.  The  restoration  is  almost  certain,  the  translator  connecting  vv.  6 
and  8  by  the  use  of  the  same  word,  although  the  Greek  is  here  "nKioviKrCw,  but 
there  oBtTiiv. 

'  To  object  to  this  term,  becaase  introdnced  from  the  Hebrew,  seems  pedantic.  It  is  retained 
by  the  learned  author  of  the  Traite  de  Grammaire  Syriaqtu. 


IN   THE  FRAGMENTS.  xxxiii 

1.  18,  word  I.  The  last  syllable  is  not  distinct,  but  doubtless  we  must  read 
the  Hier.  prep.'^ja^  {Thes.  Syr,  451)  as  in  ver.  13,  where  (see  collotype)  the 
form  is  certain. 

'^^  . . .  «qlmm}  (fKBiKos . . .  ir(pi)  from  «imj,  with  the  meaning  which  the  Hebrew 
root  has  in  Is.  i.  24,  where  PesA.  ^  ijj  >^;^bop ;  cf.  Gen.  xxvii.  42  ap.  Gesenium, 
TTies.  874.   vimj  JIter.  appears  to  be  used  as  Chald,  Dru  consolari,  see  Thes.  Syr.  2338. 

He,  Our  Lord]  So  literally,  and  certainly  suggesting  the  6  before  Kvpios,  which 
WH  omit.     The  pronoun  may  even  be  used,  Hard,  more,  as  a  rendering  of  6. 

I.  22.  The  first  word  is  doubtful.  If  we  could  read  *  v\\it.?  ()P^^  perficere) 
the  two  verbs  might  be  a  free  rendering  of  the  i:poi'ma\i.(v — we  have  finished  all  we 
have  to  say.  The  word  however  seems  to  be  from  -o>N*-,  Palest,  for  ««J9,  to  express 
TTpo,     See  further  note  on  p.  xl. 

^**ao/]  Hier.  for  ?o»joo/. 

7.  i^]  ^•pK'  a  Heb.,  but  not  apparently  a  Syr.  root.  This  particular  form  is 
not  in  Buxtorf,  and  is  probably  Palest. 

8.  jooi]  The  reading  is  certain,  but  is  probably  a  mistake  for  olo)  ille  {Thes. 
Syr.  960),  and  so  we  have  rendered  it. 

.0/  Hier.;  the  Greek  olv. 

U^]  Not  as  ver.  ri,  but  injure,  afflict,  perhaps  contemn,  like  njy  II  in  Heb.,  and 
cf.  JUGO.^  ascetic.    In  Hier.,  yox^, gentle  Mat.  xi.  29,  but  xv.  24  answered,  as  njy  I. 

9.  >a^Xv.  cf.  Col.  iv.  12  ;  here  and  ver.  13  conjunctim. 
JfcsjaL**]  See  i.  i,  where  it  is  written  Jks^Oi*. 

Ju*.(  (and  ver.  10)]  Hier.  pi.  emph.,  see  Thes.  Syr.  in. 

[juAao]  The  restoration  can  hardly  be  doubtful ;  cf.  Pesh.  .o)^A.ft*i». 

II.  20,  21  are  very  obscure,  especially  the  latter.  The  reading  seems  to  be 
.  CLflu^   yool^,  and  not  the  *jMb^  ^  of  Pesh. 

10.  ;^o»]  Hier.,  as  jioo»=lbiot,  Thes.  Syr.  960.    10X20  Hier. ;  the  Greek  \iJaKkov. 
^M^^kA.]  The  reading  appears  to  be  certain  (see  the  collotype).    The  translator 

separated  cfiiXorifidadai  from  fjavxaCeiv,  inverted  nepis.  and  ^tX.,  and  rendered  the 
latter  by  the  Peal  of  u*sijw.  The  usual  meaning  of  it*si.»,  (in  the  Pael  laudare)  is 
not  unsuitable :  Peal  (though  there  does  not  seem  to  be  an  instance  in  Pesh.  or  the 
Hexaplar)  may  here  be  used  in  the  similar  sense  {Palest,  perhaps)  oi giving  honour. 
We  have  also  the  Rabh.  T\1^  incrementum  {Buxt.  2309,  Levy  ii.  447)  and  the  verb 
in  the  text  may  be  connected  with  this  as  though  ^iX.  were  a  synonym  fdr  Trtpif. — 
in  either  case  a  poor  translation.     See  also  p.  xli. 

12.  t>-»i«.>f«.«]  In  the  sense  of  the  Heb.  T'DH;  cf.  Chald.  NfllTDn  Levy  i.  272. 
)).».fn.»  for  Kfxaptrcofievr)  occurs  in  Hard,  and  Hier.  (Luc.  i.  28),  cf.  )*.mdM  p.  11, 1.  5 ; 
but  in  Hier.  the  root  appears  to  have  elsewhere  the  other  sense  of  irridere. 

e  [n.5.] 


xxxiv  NOTES   ON   THE    VERSES 

tto^GLO  Ht'er.;  for  other  spelling,  see  Thes.  Syr.  1738. 

M^9.  is  rather  Chald.  and  Rabb.  than  Syr.  Castell  {Lex.  Syr.  p.  769)  only 
quotes  Acts  iv.  34  and  jloo^i.  Pro  v.  xxiv.  34. 

The  Rubric.    tS]  'Jlu;^  reliquorum  Syrorum/  Land,  Anecd.  Syr.  iv.  p.  204. 

I]  See  John  iv.  54  Ht'er.     '  Valde  vicina  i-oU,'  Miniscalchi  Erizzo. 

In  the  second  line,  the  form  appears  to  be  rtlicnX.  '  Inclinaitones  in  Liturgia 
Missae  sunt  commemorationes  pro  vivis  et  defunctis  secretae,  ita  dictae  quia  a 
sacerdote  inclinato  proferrentur,'  Assemani  in  Thes.  Syr.  col.  664. 

S5]  Other  forms  are  osll^,  Castell,  Bernstein;   Rabb.  '^ti\>,  Buxtorf  2091. 

13.  ^^»->\v>]  With  ribbut,  on  such  forms  superfluous,  but  no  diacritical  point. 
It  must  be  taken  as  the  passive,  and  a  Palestinian  contraction  for  .  ^-^.^^v^t* 
We  have  the  Hter.  o  "1X^00  for  iroKyM,  John  xxi,  12.  The  verb  in  Pa.  means 
to  comfort  and  encourage,  see  Thes.  Syr.  1878,  Levy  i.  400;  but  as  oJ^  is  some- 
times used  for  intellect,  perhaps  we  might  render  ^:^^>a»  Jl  without  knowledge, 
representing  the  ayvotlv. 

I.  6.  yOoil  (see  collotype)  has  here  clearly  ribbui;  see  further  note  on  p.  xl. 
IS  and  Hi]  See  collotype.    In  HiL  the  second  syllable  is  obscure ;  we  read 

)V-.**ik,,  the  Talmudic  p^B?  {Buxtorf  2'^%^).  The  word  is  marked  with  ribbui,  a 
fem.  (i.e.  neut.)  pi.,  'the  residue,'  as  though  the  translator  had  to.  \onrd.  In  Hier. 
Mat.  xxvii.  49  Lagarde  reads  )ft^w»*'  (ol  Xoittoi),  but  the  MS.  by  a  later  hand  has 
the  ribbui. 

In  1.  7  ^*A«^  Palest,  is  certainly  to  be  read,  as  Mat.  xxvi.  22  ;  see  note,  p.  xli. 

2  TIMOTHY. 

i.  10.  Aiil  Palest.,  cf.  Tit.  ii.  7.  It  must  have  been  preceded  by  JI?  for  a 
privative,  the  translator  mistaking  a^dapaiav,  or  reading  a<pdapTov.  See  further 
note  on  p.  xli. 

JfOB&d,  1.  7  ^aanft,Y>,  1.  9  )j1^«.*^ — all  Hier.  forms. 

II.  i^*.>A^ut(  and  1.  1 1  t*.  «.iift.jo>]  Palest,  »*  as  a  mater  lectionis,  like  the  }  in 
li^jo/  2  Tim.  ii.  7. 

>mftv>,  1.  1 2]  One  of  the  best  examples  in  the  fragments  (see  collotype)  of  the 
shape  of  the  inverted  Pe.  Line  14  gives  a  clear  instance  of  s  for  (i)  unaspirated  p, 
11.  I,  4  of  a  for  (ii)  aspirated p,  col.  2, 1. 12,  of  S  for  (iii)  the  Greek /*i^/'.  Although 
the  a  in  tft>^v»  is  equivalent  to  a  (i),  yet  it  stands  for  it  rather  than  6,  as  the 
verb  ttty^/  (Bar-Heb,  ap.  Thes.  Syr.  31 14)  is  borrowed  from  the  aorist  of  7ret^». 
Cf.  Duval,  Gram.  Syr.  §  11,  par.  3. 

^^A»]  Hier.    It  is  clear  (see  collotype)  that  here  no  point  was  used  to  distinguish 


IN   THE   FRAGMENTS.  xxxv 

i\it  pari,  from  the/r^/. ;  so  apparently  on  p.  17,  11.  19,  21,  22,  i^l,  loo,  and  Jl/ ; 
but  in  none  of  these  cases  is  the  meaning  ambiguous. 

KjOfAd  (and  ver.  14)  Palest,  in  the  form  and  with  the  meaning  of  Chald. 
WnpB,  Heb.  1^1153. 

13.  )u.i^]  Hier.  pi.;  J^nA*.]  cf.  i  Thess.  iv.  19. 

14.  )»,o.vi,v]  Palest,  form,  for  the  usual  passive  sense  is  unsuitable.  )»&:ax 
incola  occurs  in  Hier.  Luke  xxiv.  1 8. 

yla^]  Apparently  Palest.  In  Hier.  we  have  yO^  as  in  Pesh.  \  see  Thes. 
Syr.  s.  V.  Q^. 

15.  At  the  end  of  1.  10  is  a  clear  instance  of  the  single  stop  which  {Introd.  p.  viii) 
is  of  rare  occurrence  in  our  MSS.  Another  is  perhaps  found  at  the  end  of 
1.  4,  p.  16. 

1.  12.  The  MS.  has  tjpo.S*.^.  i.^t,  the  figure  between  a  and  %»  showing  two 
shades  of  colour,  as  though  a  continuation  of  the  ^  had  been  crossed  by  the  upper 
writing.  This  distinction  is  almost  lost  in  the  photograph,  and  the  figure  appears  in 
exaggerated  blackness.  I  considered  at  first  that  there  was  an  appendage  to  the  d, 
or  a  modification  of  the  w,  intended  to  indicate  the  sound  of  *  in  connection  with 
the  vowel  which  the  translator  read  after  it.  We  might  compare  the  modifications 
of  TT  and  of  Greek  vowels,  mentioned  by  Duval,  §  25  b.  But,  in  spite  of  the  two 
colours,  and  the  elongation  of  the  last  stroke,  I  am  willing  to  concur  in  the 
suggestion  of  Mr.  G.  Margoliouth,  that  this  stroke  is  part  of  a  n  at  the  end  of  the 
crossing  line,  the  last  word  of  which  would  then  make  with  the  first  of  the  line 
following,  the  phrase  ni^lJ  riNDIta.  The  word  "to  is  rather  cramped  for  want 
of  space,  but  the  final  stroke  of  the  last  letter  is  extended.  The  phrase  "1  ''o 
occurs  in  the  middle  of  the  line  above.  The  form  >flBa^.<.,^*q>  would  stand  for 
Phigllos,  but  the  first  vowel  may  perhaps  represent  the  v  in  <bvy.  Land  (pp.  cit. 
p.  214)  quotes  tm>.m>o>  as  occurring  several  times  for  ^v(tk  in  the  Fragmenta 
Theologica  Petropolitana.  The  Greek  vowels  were  either  confused  by  our  trans- 
lator (cf.  Col.  iv.  12)  or  represented  inconsistently.  In  the  next  two  names,  he 
uses  the  same  vowel  letter  {J)  for  ?/.     On  X  or  XX,  cf.  note  on  i  Thess.  i.  i. 

*flft*i^aao>o»]  The  o«  seems  to  represent  'Epfioyevrjs,  rather  than  'Epfx.  On  the 
forms  of  Phigelus  and  Hermogenes  in  the  MSS.,  cf.  Tisch.  in  loc. 

)j9cu*]  This  form  of  the  adjective  is  frequent  in  Hier.,  see  Thes.  Syr.  128. 

16.  ^*.ia<>*>]  With  w  in  the  first  syllable.  Palest. 

i..;^]   With  ribbui,  and  apparently  always.     Cf.  Tit.  ii.  2,  L  13  and  note. 
iSil']  We  read  j ;  the  point  is  faintly  legible  in  the  word  written  across.     The 
form  will  be  the  Aph.  of  iiSi — Ithpa.  mpflN  refigeravit  se,  Buxtorf  2153. 

17.  )jco>]  As  in  the  subscription  to  Colossians.    The  form  is  usually  woco* 

e  2 


xxxvi  NOTES   ON   THE    VERSES 

or  wooooti  {'Pafir]),  See  Schaa/s.  v.,  and  Bernstein's  Lexicon,  p.  471.  Ours  corre- 
sponds rather  to  Roma,  and  is  perhaps  a  Latinism. 

18  (also  16).  .V**]  The  Heb.  form,  Hter.  {Thes.  Syr.  s.v.)  has  for  the  verb^fco, 
but  .fco  gives  a  noun,  which  Lagarde  at  Mark  xv.  45  writes  )l»6]^>..^,  but  at  Mat. 
vii.  II,  in  the  plural,  ^ol^oo. 

1.  5.  We  had  ^^^,m>*'9  p.  17,  1.  16;  here  the  MS,  appears  to  have  HTf 
scripHo  defectiva. 

1,  II,  '^«-»]  A  clear  instance  (for  here  there  is  no  upper  writing)  that  the 
participle  was  not  usually  distinguished  by  a  point;  see  note  on  1,  13,  ver.  12, 

:]  This  stop  is  here,  and  apparently  in  some  other  places,  final,  and  not 
subordinate, 

ii.  I.  IS]  Cf,  I  Thess.  iv,  11.  Here  )>m,«.»;  cf.  |ca^)m9  above,  Scrip.pl.  is 
perhaps  in  place  of  dagesh  forte,  for  Buxtorf  (798)  gives  NTiDH,  but  that  word 
apparently  always  follows  the  other  meaning  reproach.    .?,  see  p,  19,  1,  10. 

2,  ^tfL^s  in  the  sense  of  trader e  is  specially,  though  not  exclusively,  Hter.,  and 
is  the  Heb.  "IDO. 

kAi^o^aa]  In  Hi'er.  we  have  the  common  form  *omo.  Stoddard  (in  Thes.  Syr. 
235)  gives  the  modern  form  ^cf,  which  is  like  the  Palest,  form  as  read  here 
and  I  Thess,  iv,  14. 

»of]  The  Hier.  w)L»o?  or  u^-aoo?,  cf.  Thes.  Syr.  840,  Miniscalchi  Erizzo  s,v. 
It  represents  the  reading  Ikovo'i.  rather  than  hwaxoi.     .a9>\I  Palest,  form. 

3,  A.CU*]  The  root  in  Hier.,  as  in  ordinary  Syriac,  means  pati;  cf,  a-cuoo 
(Col.  iv,  13)  a  Palest,  form,  as  it  seems,  for  |l«.**  passio,  ''^^  jl^  {Thes.  Syr. 
1389)  usually  means  to  be  compassionate,  a  meaning  hardly  suitable  here.  The 
three  words  are,  no  doubt,  an  attempt  to  render  avyKaKoirddrjaov,  and  show  that  the 
translator  had  that  reading  before  him. 

4,  1.  8,  In  the  sense  of  involve  oneself,  Ethpe.  and  Ethpa.  are  both  used 
according  to  Thes.  Syr.  1 824-1 825;  the  Pe.  occurs  in  Hier. 

1,  9.  ]^-->'^  Mat.  xxiii.  5  Hier.    1.  10.  ^.lii.?]  Cf,  Chald.  p^  ille. 
1,  12.  ioajfc*]  Palest,  in  form;  Pesh.  a^ju. 

5,  I/]  Palest.,  representing  the  aQXtw.  Chald.  p"it3  {Buxt.  921)  does  not  quite 
give  the  meaning;  jsj^  is  doubtful,  Thes.  Syr.  1527,  but  adj.  \ji'^  occurs  with  the 
meanings  of  nobilis  and  strenuus. 

6,  )aja*»/]  Hier.  and  Chald.,  Thes.  Syr.  381,  Levy  i.  68, 

^au]  oportet,  as  Mat.  xxv.  27,  John  iv,  24,  Hier.  In  both  places  Lagarde 
also  edits'^^aj  ;  emendation  therefore  (see  Thes.  Syr.  2416)  seems  unnecessary. 

**)lso>o]  John  i.  27  Lagarde  edits  M)L:AA^  'A  Dip,  ad  Hier,  dialecti  consuetu- 
dinem,'  Miniscalchi  Erizzo  s.  v. 


IN  THE  FRAGMENTS.  xxxvii 

|L»*»]  pi  emph.  of  the  Hier.  and  Chald.  NT'S. 

7.  jol  in  Syriac  is  stupere,  Cast.  955;  here  the  word  has  the  meaning  of  the 
Heh,  "i^n  and  represents  the  vo'et. 

llijw/]  For  the  form  compare  t....^Q.,o.flftl/  2  Tim.  i.  11.  There  is  no  stop 
legible  after  this  word ;  we  supply  one,  otherwise  the  ^  would  depend  on  what 
precedes,  as  though  the  reading  were  Xeyco  o-ot ;  but  what  the  text  was  a  pr.  m.  is 
uncertain. 

TITUS. 

i.  II,  1.  I.  a^,  with  pron.  suf.,  occurs  in  Hier.,  see  Thes.  Syr.  882;  it  here 
represents  the  x'^P"'^  ^"^^  the  preceding  ^  (Ik)  seems  superfluous,  but  we  have 
'^J*^  ^  John  iii.  3  Hier. — cf.  the  compounds  in  Duval  296 ;  in  line  11  ">\  is 
followed  by  a  particle.  ^  might  be  the  Greek  \i.iv,  /xrjv,  as  so  often  in  Hard.,  but 
there  is  nothing  in  the  original  to  countenance  this. 

12.  Jja^l]  Apparently  Palest.;  other  forms,  and  the  verbal  root,  occur  in 
Syr.  and  Chald. 

The  Gloss.  Although  in  smaller  characters,  this  is  written  in  a  good 
and  ancient  hand,  and  is  not  necessarily  later  than  the  text.  It  ascribes  the 
words  to  Epimenides  alone,  whereas  in  Hard,  we  read  o>o«,iuo»a^*.S>??  \^a^ 
«)uj^»aD  tjoaoj^^n  >W)ua?o  «]la.^;j9  )c«o^,  a  divination  of  Epimenides  the 
Cretan  diviner,  and  of  Callimachus  the  Cyrenian. 

oott**-]   With  mat.  led.,  like  )^vi\*j>>,  etc. ;  see  2  Tim.  ii.  i  n. 

ipajftij]  Palest.,  cf.  the  Chald.  DDip ;  the  Syrians  spell  with  .,  as  in  the 
Harclean  gloss. 

1.  6.  >/]  If  the  reading  be  certain,  it  is  a  mistake  for  ^.  tJ^'^oaa  semper 
is  frequent  in  Hier.,  cf.  Thes.  Syr.  2800. 

Ja*»»]  A  Palest,  plural  form,  the  (*•),  which  we  have  supplied,  being  illegible; 
or  it  is  the  singular,  used  as  a  collective. 

13.  i[o]  The  Chald.  D"'trp,  so  (ver.  14)  5!^=  NnB>"lp;  cf.  Hed.  t2B>p,  parallel 
with  riDN  Prov.  xxii.  21.     In  Syr.  the  t3  is  changed  to  i,  and  the  usual  form 

is    ]]^CU3. 

.  ♦a  a^]   See  note  on  ver.  1 1  and  Num.  v.  3. 

Z^]  The  restoration  can  hardly  be  doubtful.  The  adverb  occurs  at  i  Cor. 
XV.  52  Pesh.  as  a  translation  of  iv  drd/ift).  Perhaps  the  translator  intended  some- 
thing similar  here — reprove  in  a  moment,  eagerly;  either  mistaking  the  dnorofiws,  or 
having  another  reading. 

14.  i^]  The  reading  appears  certain;  the  form  must  he  part. pass,  {hnt  in 
a  middle  sense)  of  Pael  or  Aphel.     In  the  latter,  and  in  Peal,  the  word  often  occurs 


xxxviii  NOTES   ON   THE    VERSES 

as  injicere.  Bernstein  (Lexicon,  p.  486)  cites  from  Assemani  ^iA:M9i  part.  Peil 
'de  fluminibus  quae  se  injiciunt.'  It  is  a  strong  rendering  of  ■npo(T€xovTfs.  Pesh. 
has  Ethpe.  .cl»>]^  Do,  'et  ne  adjiciant  se,'  but  var.  led.  .cl^?V>>,  'attendant;' 
see  Schaaf  Z^^.  pp.  n8,  551. 

I.  22.  Pesh.  has  the  curious  reading  ^^JLao?,  who  hate  the  truth.  In  our  text 
the  last  part  of  the  word  So?  is  illegible,  but  the  third  letter  is  almost  certainly  o», 
and  not  £o,  which  the  Pesh.  reading  requires ;  therefore  we  restore  ^*aSo».x>». 
Aph.  often  has  the  meaning  avertere,  Thes.  Syr.  1038 ;  our  form  may  be  a  pass.,  or 
intrans.  participle,  representing  the  cmoarpa^oikkvwv.  In  Hier.  (Mat.  xvii.  17,  Luke 
ix.  41)  we  have  ^otJ«  for  Stfo-rpa/i/x/w; — in  the  former  place  Lagarde  points  s^o^sa. 

15.  o)>mv>  (11.  4,  9)  2l pass,  part.,  cf.  Num.  v.  3. 

1.  5.  Here  apparently  with  %»  in  the  second  syllable,  cf.  2  Tim.  ii.  i. 

1.  8.  This  seems  to  be  Palest,  for  Chald.  and  Syr.^.^\.  There  being  only 
one  letter  between  ^4^  and  o»,  we  read  ^;.ao,  a  contracted  form ;  cf.  ^o»j»a  for 
^^A^o^:^  2  Tim.  ii.  2,  )lcu)  (ut  vid.)  i  Thess.  iv.  3,  y\  Num.  iv.  49,  and  ;^for  i*^. 

16.  In  the  first  word  of  1.  12,  ao,  *».,  ^  are  distinct,  and  there  is  room  in  the 
lacuna  for  ioo ;  we  therefore  read  ^o.io*»x),  which  in  Hier.  is  usually  Peal,  but 
Aphel  occurs  in  John  i.  36.     The  translator  misunderstood  dhivai^  or  had  in  his 

copy  Ihtiv  or  Ibeadai.      Col.  iv.  1 7  uVa-  stands  for  ^XeTre. 

1,  19.   S5  in  this  sense  Palest,  and  Chald.,  cf.  Luke  xvi.  15  Hier. 

1.  21.  ^0/  Hier.  The  word  is  followed  by  a  small  lacuna,  with  a  trace  of  an 
initial  «*.     We  therefore  read  [x\^''^y»  as  Pesh. 

ii.  2.  om]  The  reading  seems  certain.  (  is  mat.  led.;  with  j  (e.g.  i.  13)  the 
shorter  form  occurs.     OX.  fern.  w{oo»  in  Hier.,  Thes.  Syr.  986. 

3.  in  like  manner]  Literally  so  and  thus;  the  formula  is  Hier.,  and  ^  in  the 
sense  of  so,  is  specially,  though  not  exclusively,  Hier. 

I.  9.  The  adjective,  in  the  sing.,  and  with  f ,  clearly  agrees  with  raiment.  They 
read  Uponpfirti. 

II.  11,15.  ^«y,  aXaa]  In  each  case  with,  as  it  seems,  a  Palest,  fern.  pi.  termi- 
nation. For  inserted  I,  cf.  .{oom  (3rd/'/.  m)  1.  i  sup.,  vic^^  {1st pi.  su/.)  p.  17, 
1.  6,  wioot  {2nd  pl./em.  imperat.)  ii.  2  n. ;   also  ^^OaOmJu  1.  16  inf.,  )l  in  Aph.fut. 

1.  12.  An  obscure  line,  (i)  D  is  required  as  the  first  word,  (ii)  the  first  and  last 
two  letters  of  the  second  word  are  legible,  and  we  restore  .  »">  %■  v>  in  agreement 
with  the  reading,  p.  23, 1.  2 — the  Shaphel  as  in  Pesh.  Eshtaphal  forms  occur  in 
Hier. 

1.  13.  The  second  word,  in  the  present  state  of  the  MS.,  appears  to  terminate 
in  a  . ,  but  probably  is  not  to  be  so  read,  for  ;jAm  is  in  the  sing.     The  adjective 

m  has  ribbui,  as  fol.  i  r  a,  1.  1 5,  etc.,  and  perhaps  was  so  pointed,  by  a  fancy 


IN  THE  FRAGMENTS.  xxxix 

of  the  Palest,  scribes,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  adverb  u^o  valde.    The  latter 
does  not  occur  in  our  fragments. 

4.  \.*i\  Aph.  Palest  form;  in  Pesh.,  etc.,  Pa.  is  used  in  this  sense. 
)IU^,  with  Y  inserted,  Palest.,  cf.  note  on  1.  11,  and  the  Chald.  pi.  ttn^^B, 

Levy  i.  303.     We  add  ribbm,  which  is  legible  in  f  >N  J  ver.  6. 

I.  19,  et  inf.,  yOo»  niasc.  suf.  iox/em.,  apparently  Palest.    Cf.  Col.  iv.  16  and  note. 

II.  20,  21,  and  (4  V  b)  1.  3,  the  restorations  are  obvious.     tOM  as  in  Hier. 

1.  22.  An  instance  of  the  •: ,  which  is  so  frequently  found  (see  Lagarde)  in  the 
Vatican  Evangelistarium.     The  same  stop  occurs  below,  4  v  b,  1.  22. 

5,  1.  I.  The  first  three  letters  of  the  first  word  are  clear,  and  the  meaning 
must  be  such  as  we  have  expressed,  although  there  is  no  exact  parallel  in  the 
references  in  Thes.  Syr.  or  Buxtorf.    The  phrase  represents  olKovpyovs  rather  than 

olKOVpOVS. 

1.  4.  II]  There  is  apparently  a  dot  above  the  >  (cf.  note  on  ^.^  i  Thess.  i.  2) 
although  the  letter  is,  of  course,  d.  Perhaps  the  dot  indicates  Ethpa.,  see  Thes. 
Syr.  659,  the  verb  only  occurring  in  this  and  in  the  Pa.;  but  probably  it  is  a 
mistake. 

1.  9.   The  first  letter  is  distinct.     Pesh.  has  **^^  jOAot. 

7.  t-^^N,  Hier. ;  cf.  Col.  iv.  12  n. — de,  propter  {Thes.  Syr.  s.  v.)  as  if  ndvrav; 
see  p.  xxi. 

«>]  The  Greek  ie,  and  common  in  Ht'er.  We  have  had  before  the  ordinary 
form  ^f,  e.g.  cap.  ii.  i, 

i^]  The  Hed.  Q'M :  in  this  sense  very  common  in  Ht'er.,  very  rare  in  other 
Syriac ;  see  Thes.  Syr.  s.  v. 

1.  13.  S^]  The  Greek  rvnog.  In  other  Syriac  {Thes.  Syr.  s.  v.)  the  form  is 
juoaSa^.  The  third  letter  is  somewhat  obscure,  but  is  almost  certainly  d,  although 
TT  requires  S. 

)>i9>\o/]  As  ver.  i. 

1.  15.  ^>l  JJ]  Cf.  2  Tim.  i.  10,  p.  16;  here  to  represent  d<f)6op[ap,  as  there 
(apparently)  for  d(fidap(Tiav,  but  the  preceding  line  has  perished.  The  verb  ()lS>  or 
ASj)  perhaps  had  in  Palest,  a  neuter  meaning,  spoiled,  destroyed.  Cf.  u3>  laxare, 
also  the  Heb.  PiSl,  in  the  phrase  DVn  ''n  Jud.  xix.  9. 

1.  19.  A  lacuna  of  about  two  letters,  but  not  enough  for  the  termination  Jl. 
The  restoration  is  supported  by  Pesh.  o^  ♦xoa  ju}  JJo,  and  this  verb' occurs  in 
Hier.,  but  not  the  form  \xda. 

1.  20.    ^?o»  as  well  as  ^?o»  is  quoted  from  Hier.;  the  Chald.  |nn. 

1.  22.   We  restore  in  agreement  with  the  let^j  oi  Pesh. 


ADDITIONAL     NOTES. 

The  sign  of  the  plural. 

In  the  note  on  i  Thess.  i.  2  (p.  xxxii)  we  remarked  that  the  plural  form  ^\ 
seems  regularly  to  have  been  written  with  rihbui  in  our  fragments.  Clear  examples 
may  be  seen  on  Plate  II,  col.  2, 1. 1,  and  especially  I.  13.  The  same  plate  shows 
the  plural  form  yooil  with  (")  in  col.  i,  1. 18,  and  col.  2,  1.  6,  but  the  points  are  not 
legible  in  col.  i,  1.  13,  or  col.  2,  1.  3.  Again,  such  distinctly  plural  forms  as  ^«iid 
and  ..  '^ft^  may  be  seen  in  the  middle  of  the  plate  with  the  ("),  while  other 
examples  abound  in  the  fragments.  We  may  conclude  that  it  was  the  custom  to 
make  a  free,  and  often  superfluous,  use  of  these  points;  which  is  the  more 
remarkable  because,  as  we  have  seen  (e.  g.  2  Tim.  i.  1 8,  p.  xxxvi),  the  diacritical 
point,  which  is  frequently  desirable  to  distinguish  the  participle  from  the  preterite, 
was  usually  neglected  by  the  scribe. 

If  we  compare  Plate  XVIII  of  the  BriL  Mus.  Cat.  of  Syr.  MSB.  with  the 
transcript  in  Lagarde  (p.  311)  of  the  same  passage  (Mat.  xxvi.  56-64)  we  see 
this  custom  with  respect  to  the  plurals  prevailing  both  in  the  older  leaf  and  in  the 
eleventh-century  Roman  MS.  On  the  other  hand  the  later  Brit.  Mus.  texts  do 
not  exhibit  such  a  free  use  of  the  ribbui,  according  to  the  facsimiles  on  Plates  XIX 
and  XX ;  the  former  being  from  a  MS.  which  Wright  assigned  to  the  tenth  or 
eleventh  century,  the  latter  from  a  codex  at  least  a  century  younger. 

^ift\i>.  I  Thess.  iv.  6. 

This  word  will  strike  the  reader  as  the  most  curious  in  our  text ;  but  when  we 
have  acquired  a  wider  knowledge  of  the  Palestinian  dialect  than  the  remains,  which 
are  now  available,  afford,  it  may  be  found  that  many  words,  borrowed  from  the 
Arabic  and  elsewhere,  were  in  common  use  for  the  most  ordinary  expressions. 
To  confirm  my  own  conclusion  about  the  reading,  I  asked  Professor  D.  S. 
Margoliouth  to  make  an  independent  examination  of  the  place,  which  he  very 
kindly  did,  and  has  written  to  me  as  follows : — 

'  I  have  strained  a  good  deal  over  the  Syriac  word,  and  think  >  '  ^^  ^  y  the  right  reading  of 
it.  I  presume  the  natural  Syriac  for  itpoeinaiKv  would  be  ^iml  ^i^o*J9  ;  now  it  certainly  is  the 
case  that  in  Arabic  the  verb  '._o\raj  means  something  very  like  «*£ ;  the  Arabic  lexicons  give 

|,jLfij  as  its  equivalent.    "Payment  in  advance"  in  Arabic  is  LaJL**  xJjJl.     The  verb  in  the  second 

form  (Pa"el)  means  "  to  send  before,"  praemittere.    If  therefore  the  reading  of  the  radical  letters 
»9>N,i>  be  right,  it  is  difficult  to  avoid  the  conjecture  that  this  is  a  dialectic  variety  for  lP«i9.' 


ADDITIONAL  NOTES.  xli 

Dr.  Payne  Smith,  taking  the  same  view,  writes : — 

'The  Arabic  <_a.l..«<  is  to  anticipate  in  time,  prevent.  Bnt  it  seems  strange  that  the  trans- 
lator should  have  gone  out  of  his  way  when  so  common  a  phrase  as  ^iiO{  ^uo^x  was  at  his 
hand.  Modern  Syriac,  which  often  goes  to  the  Arabic,  gives  us  no  help,  as  Ai^LiiL  is  to  dislocate 
a  joint,  evidently  a  sense  taken  from  -^^^  to  draw  out  (a  sword),  but  also  a  joint.' 

According  to  Miniscalchi  Erizzo,  A^k*,  only  occurs  in  Ht'er.  once  (John  xviii.  lo) 
and  is  used  in  the  sense  of  extrahere. 

.»tf  ■'T  {Plate  II,  col.  I,  /.  6)  I  Thess.  iv.  lo. 

Although  the  reading  of  the  text  of  our  MS.  can  hardly  be  anything  but  the 
pres.  part.,  it  is  possible  that  the  original  reading  was  «<•»».->»,.  The  omission  of  a 
w,  in  a  word  of  this  form,  is  an  error  from  which  even  the  most  careful  scribe  is 
not  always  exempt.  The  Syiiac  would  then  exactly  represent  rifu'iaOai,  either 
because  the  translator  had  that  word  in  his  Greek,  or  because  he  misunderstood 
<PiXoTifitla6ai ;  and  ^>i»>.-^«,  would  not  be  unsuitable  to  the  context — that  ye  he  held 
in  abundant  honour  (through  your  integrity)  being  peaceable  and  laborious. 

^*A.»— VI  {Plate  II,  col.  2,  /.  7)  I  Thess.  iv.  13. 

The  form  is  not  distinct,  the  second  syllable  being  suggestive  of  **ih.,  and 
^<ji^^.aa  occurs  in  Pesh.,  although  here  it  has  a  different  phrase,  .aa^  \-*'<^- 
But  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  we  must  read  the  Hier.  form,  which  we  have 
adopted,  the  Heh.  pIV.     Several  examples  are  cited  in  Thes.  Syr.  s.  v. 

«a>l  {Plate  III,  col.  i,  /.  i)  2  Tim.  i.  10. 
According  to  Dr.  Land  this  form  is  a  noun  in  Theologica  Petropolitana,  fr.  50. 
It  occurs  in  the  phrase  ^>l  D?  '^-fc^,  and  in  the  vocabulary  in  Anecd.  Syr.  iv.  he 
writes  '  inquisitio  (?).'    But  if  we  allow  a  possible  error  in  the  gender,  it  may  be 
a  verb  (3rd  fern,  fut.)  as  it  is  in  our  text. 

MS.  fol.  3  r. 
On  the  top  of  the  page  (see  Plate  III)  is  an  obscure  word,  probably  the  heading 
tflDoil^ofiMJ  T(/idd(or. 

MS.  fol.  4  V. 

On  the  top  of  this  page  we  find,  in  an  early  hand,  the  following  form : — 

X 
X   r^(^i\,re'  X 

i.  e.  *  Epistle.'  This  is  a  confirmation  of  the  view  we  have  taken  (see  p.  xix)  that 
our  fragments  belonged  to  a  complete  copy  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  and  not  to 
a  Service  Book. 


as 

dering  the  affairs  of 
their  houses,  good,  in 
subjection  to  their 
husbands,  that  the 
word  of  God  may 
not  be  blasphemed. 
And  of  those  who 
are  young  men  in 
hke  manner  be  be- 
seeching that  they 
be  prudent.  On  ac- 
count of  everything 
moreover,  present  thy- 
self a  type  of  good 
works,  in  doctrine 
which  may  not  be 
corrupted,  which  is  in 
faith  in  the  sure  word 
which  is  not  despised; 
in  order  that  he 
who  riseth  in  op- 
position [  may  be 
ashamed  ]       when 


TITUS  11.  5-8. 


MS.  4  V  b 


■  ■  k.\CV3    ^*^QO  ver.6 

>1 


ver.  7 


:  &ioi    r^Ai  15 

r%  a\«JbJ^Q«A  ver.  8 

:[r<'%]jLflQ=>  KlXi 
^jjcni  Xat^A  20 

1^   .:ii[cnA^] 


TITUS  II.  a-5. 


22 


let  them  be  gentle, 
wise,  firm  in  faith, 
in  love,  in  patience. 
The  aged  women  in 
like  manner  let  them 
be  in  raiment  which 
becometh  godliness. 
Not  calumniators,  not 
devoted  to  much 
wine.  But  let  them 
be  good  teachers,  that 
they  make  the  young 
women  prudent,  that 
they  be  loving  to 
their  husbands,  that 
they  be  loving  to 
their  children,  prudent, 
holy,  and  may  be  or- 


MS.  4  V  a 


K^oi-n  ■■■ML  .n 

^^    ^^-^^  ^  ^  ^-P  ver.  3 


10 


0^=1^  ^j^ii^Nr^a  15 

»M*^   i   ^  Jjy^i.«J>^  ver.  4 

:  «XlCTXjLJL2kjaJi 


21 

the  truth.  Everything 
t's  pure  to  the  pure; 
but  to  those  who  are 
defiled  and  do  not 
believe  there  is  no- 
thing whatever  pure, 
but  also  their  mind  t's 
defiled  and  their  con- 
science; and  they  are 
professing  that  they 
are  seeing  God,  and 
in  their  works  they 
are  denying  Him,  and 
are  hateful,  and  not 
obedient,  and  to  every 
good  work  reprobate. 
But  do  thou  speak 
that  which  becometh 
the  sound  doctrine. 
Their       aged       men 


TITUS  I.  IS— II'  2. 


&Or<^  i^Xk'  of^lAl 


MS.  4  r  b 
ver.  15 


«X^CI30lir^o^0  10 
«^JlCT31    ^ICOQO  ver.  16 

^aIt^cvi^wo  cTxa  15 

^1    Gir^  o>  l\lCYl^  ii.  I 


ver.  3 


TITUS  /.  11-14. 


20 


D9    ::] 


on  account  of  polluted 
gain.  Saith  one,  he 
a    prophet   of    them, 

cfl  g*  that     the      sons      of 

2  i> 

o    3 

w  §-'  KYlta  are  in  all  their 
o  I  time  liars,  evil  beasts, 
-,:  M*  idle  bellies.  This 
3  witness  is  true,  there- 
fore sharply  be  re- 
proving them,  that 
they  may  be  firm 
in  the  faith,  and 
may  not  be  throw- 
ing themselves  away 
unto  words  of  the 
Jews,  and  unto  com- 
mandments of  the 
sons  of  men,  who 
turn        away       from 


MS.  4  r  a 


OCI3     l^Jlr^  T«^^Qr%  ver.  12 
f%    ViYjl     r^lCtJ  rer.  13 

»A-AT.n.A    :  >ci3  II 

^^.^ICQa     f^lACI  ver.  14 

rsfiocriAi 


J9 


a  TIMOTHY  II.  a-7. 


may  teach  others. 
Bear  up  against  evil, 
as  the  good  warrior 
of  Jesus  the  Christ. 
No  man  who  warreth, 
warreth  and  involveth 
himself  in  the  business 
of  the  world  :  that  he 
may  please  him  who 
enrolled  him;  and  if 
a  man  strive  he  is  not 
crowned  except  law- 
fully he  do  strive. 
The  husbandman  who 
laboureth,  it  behoves 
that  he  first  of  the 
fruits  should  be  eat- 
ing. Consider  that 
which  I  myself 
have    said;     to    thee 


MS.  3  V  b 


ver.  3 


vr\*cn 


opc\,  .m    .ii  5 

ver.  4 


cn^l  >  n  s  n 
«^r<b  :ia2kZ.aver.5 

r<V^l2il    f^lflGLAir^ver.  6 

f^l^r^l  r^LM  ioci  ver.  7 

C  2 


2  TIMOTHY  I.  ^^^11.  2. 


i8 


to  Roma,  he  sought 
me  dihgently  and 
found  me.  May  the 
Lord  grant  him  that 
he  may  find  mercy 
with  Him  in  that 
day;  and  every  way 
that  he  ministered  to 
me  at  Ephesus  thou 
knowest  well.  Thou 
therefore,  my  son,  be 
strong  in  the  grace, 
that  which  ts  in  our 
Lord  Jesus  the  Christ; 
and  those  things  which 
thou  hast  heard  from 
me,  by  the  hand  of 
many  witnesses,  these 
deliver  to  faithful  men, 
those  who  shall  be 
fit;     that    they    also 


•  MS.  3va 


^Sirt'  hyr^  :.^"U 


10 


II.  I 


^S^Yl   ^ 


15 

CT30  ver.  a 


20 


17  3 

the  Christ.  The  good 
deposit  keep  in  the 
Holy  Spirit,  this  One 
who  dwelleth  in  the 
midst  of  us.  Thou 
knowest  this,  that 
there  have  turned 
themselves  from  me 
all  those  who  are  in 
Asia;  of  whom  one 
is  Phtgilos  and  the 
other  HermOgenls. 
May  the  Lord  grant 
mercies  to  the  house 
of  Onlsephoros,  for 
many  times  he  re- 
freshed my  Spirit, 
and  of  my  chain  he 
was  not  ashamed ; 
but    when    he    came 

[H.  5] 


TIMOTHY  I.  14-17. 


MS.  3  r  b 

»l   1  Y  *aq 


ver.  14 


:cnil\cv^Qia3 

T^\^^^     ^,^\a  ver.  16 

cnc\*n\  ^A^QjjLAi  16 

>o0lZ.jJL3O  20 

f^oir^  T^  f^iAr%  ver.17 


be  abolished,  in  the 
gospel;  that  for  which 
I  am  appointed  a 
herald  and  an  apos- 
tle, and  a  teacher. 
For  the  sake  of  this 
cause,  I  also  endure 
these  things,  but  I  am 
not  ashamed;  for  I 
know  in  whom  I  have 
believed,  and  I  am 
persuaded  that  He 
is  able  to  keep  my 
deposit  to  that  day. 
Let  there  be  with 
thee  the  pattern 
of  the  sound  words, 
those  which  thou 
hast  heard  from  me 
in  faith  and  in  love 
which     is     in    Jesus 


i6 

MS.  3  r  a 


ver.  II 


ver.  13 


TIMOTHY  I.  10-13. 

r<HcT3  \at:A 

\  %  1    OCI31 

of^llMClA   OCQA  15 
V^nS      rvvTjOl  ver.  13 


^Aci3    I^i^TaHJL 


QpQ   On    I   *ii 


15  I   THESSALONIANS  IV.  13-15. 

We     do     not     wish, 


brethren,  that  ye 
should  not  be  [?]  tak- 
ing heart  on  account  of 
those  who  sleep,  that 
ye  be  not  sorrowing 
like  all  that  which 
also  the  rest  are,  those 
who  have  not  hope; 
for  if  we  believe  that 
Jesus  died  and  rose, 
so  also  will  God 
those  who  have  fallen 
asleep  in  Jesus  him- 
self bring  with  Him. 
For  this  we  say  to 
you  in  the  word  of 
the     Lord,    that    we 


MS.  2  V  b 
ver.  13 


ver. 14 


0>   i  \l   ■    i   iCfJ  10 

y\  no  o\  ■  *w 
aof<'  [f<l]i:icn  15 
^ActA  r<VrAr^ 
CpOfHi*!   Cl^^Qll 

r<w.ijJM  OCV3 

r%  IGG     :  00,^0  Nil  ver.  15 

ci3^\vi*i  «.S;A 


I  THESSALONIANS  IV.  ii,  12. 


to  all  the  brethren 
who  are  in  Makedo- 
nia.  But  we  beseech 
of  you,  brethren,  that 
ye  be  the  more  increas- 
ing [?  giving  honour] 
and  abounding,  and 
that  ye  be  quiet  and 
occupied  in  your  occu- 
pations, and  that  ye  be 
labouring  with  your 
hands,  according  to  all 
which  we  commanded 
you;  that  ye  be  walk- 
ing piously  towards 
those  who  are  without, 
and  that  of  man  ye  be 
not  at  all  in  need. 

Lesson  the  second ; 
Kephalion  of  Inclination. 


r*^  K^^ 


XctfA 


14 

MS.  3  V  a 


■    i  \CT3    OlClA  15 

3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3 

.r<Ljca..\l    ^..Qj  \  *N   n  20 

533333333 


ver.  1 1 


ver.  12 


13 


I  THESSALONIANS  IV.  7-10. 


MS.  a  rb 


to  you  and  testified. 
For  God  did  not  call 
you  unto  filthiness, 
but  unto  holiness. 
That  one  therefore, 
whosoever  oppresseth, 
of  man  he  is  not  an 
oppressor,  but  of  God, 
who  hath  put  his  Holy 
Spirit  within  you. 
Concerning,  however, 
love  of  the  brethren, 
ye  do  not  need  that  I 
should  write  to  you. 
For  ye  yourselves 
are  taught  of  God 
that  ye  should  love 
one  another.  For  be- 
hold ye  are  doing  it 


f<^o.  >  n  y\ 

^SO     ^^.Of^  r^toCV3  ver.  8 

K^is   ocn  i\A 

Gf3G\-iA      ^CflmmJk^    10 

*^i>[f<|  f<l[  nVl  tri\  15 
«^cv^ovji  ^>g\n,jjoii  20 

%ii^^?3    o%^CV^  ^  \  ver.ro 


MS.  ara 


of  God,  your  sancti- 
fication,  that  ye  keep 
aloof  from  fornication, 
and  that  every  man 
should  know,  of  you, 
to  be  keeping  his 
own  vessel,  in  honour 
and  in  holiness;  not 
in  passion  of  desire, 
according  to  all  that 
which  the  Gentiles 
do,  those  who  know 
not  God;  that  no 
man  be  transgressing 
and  [oppressing]  his 
brother  in  the  matter, 
because  that  He,  our 
Lord,  shall  take  ven- 
geance on  account 
of  all  these  things, 
according  to  all  that 
which  we  before  said 


I  THESSALONTANS  IV.  3-6. 

•^^  r^to[cT2.]aici  Yer.4 


f^  \  ver.  5 
r<SCLJ^QL— Uull  10 

fvliAl    of^CTXAf^lJA  ver.6 
lUiiAf^  T^QflmA  15 


II 


to  the  congregation 
of  the  Thesalonikaije 
in  God  the  Father, 
and  in  our  Lord  Jesus 
the  Christ.  Grace 
be  with  you  and 
peace,  from  God, 
our  Father,  and  from 
our  Lord  Jesus  the 
Christ.  We    give 

thanks  to  God,  at 
every  time,  for  the 
sake  of  you  all ;  and 
we  have  made  the 
memorials  of  you, 
in  our  prayers;  with- 
out ceasing  remem- 
bering the  work  of 
your  faith,  and  the 
labour  of  [your]  love 


I  THESSALONIANS  I.  1-3. 


\  ^ 


\ 


MS.ivb 


o 


of^LuLlXlM    ODdfiOkA  10 


ver.  3 


«^CT3a\-A  15 
f<lXl    o«^ClXf^£^  ver.3 


[^.CL^jdiiricuji 


30 


B  2 


COLOSSIANS  IV.  i8.    i  THESSALONIANS  I.  i.  lo 

MS.  IV* 

Remember  ye   them,  ^^QT^lolf^ 

even       my       bonds.  ^^ 

May    grace    be    with 


>CTaA 


you. 


Ended  is  the  Epistle 
which  is  to  the  Kolosaije. 
Now  it  was  written  from 
Roma,  and  was  sent 
with  Ticikos,  and  with 
[Onjisimos. 


to(\  *ii  I  tM  I  [■lOrt']  pajL.O  II 


Epistle  of  the  Thesalo- 
nikaija,  The  First. 

Paulos   and    Silvanos 
and        TlmOtheos 


ODClAcL^i.i 
OoCUcAaJDoO 


15 


9 

lute  the  brethren, 
those  who  are  in 
Ladikija,  and  Num- 
phas,  and  also  the 
Church  which  is  in 
her    house.  And 

when   there   shall  be 
read  before  you  this 
epistle,      cause      that 
also    in    the    Church 
of     Ladikija     it     be 
read :     also     do    ye 
read   this   one  which 
is  in   Ladikija.     And 
say  also  to  Archlpos, 
Look    to    the    minis- 
try,  this  which   thou 
didst   receive    in    the 
Lord,  that  thou  fulfil 
it.        The    salutation 
by      my      hand,      of 
me     Paulos     myself. 

[II.  5.] 


COLOSSIANS  IV.  15-18. 


MS.  irb 


r^'lJSChoi    T^CI  ver.  16 

r<^(^T^ia  [^]Of<H  10 

>cnOTD  «^(^r^ 
<^in*iXai  f<^icn  14 

&Or^  O^JMr^fel  ver.  17 


:  CTSuVji  ver.  18 


21 


,teC\XciJL   f<^f^  AaI 


B 


COLOSSIANS  IV.  12-15. 


There  saluteth  you 
Epaphros,  he  who 
is  of  you,  a  servant 
of  Jesus  the  Christ, 
he  who  at  every  time 
striveth  on  your  be- 
half in  prayer,  that 
ye  may  stand  perfect 
and  complete  in  all 
the  will  of  God.  For 
I  bear  witness  con- 
cerning him  that  he 
hath  great  anxiety 
on  behalf  of  you,  and 
for  those  who  are  in 
Ladlkija  and  in  Jl- 
heropolls.  There 

saluteth    you     Lucas, 

the  physician ;  and 
Demas.  Sa- 


8 

MS.  I  r  * 


ocn  Q0Ci'i&^r< 

QoCl    m    ml 

f^kLlr^    ^AJQoJ^Q  ver.  13 

•Z-CUjJM  >\fh    cn\  15 


icn^^o  19 


ver.  14 


c\f<ljL     :  OaJ^lO  ver.  15 


NUMBERS   V.  6-9. 

MS.vb 
.  ver.  5 


of  the  sons  of  men, 
and  who  a  transgres- 
sion shall  transgress, 
and  the  soul  shall  it- 


unto  it  one  of  five, 
and  let  him  pay  to 
him  against  whom  he 


[shall  do]  any  offence     [r<^&VjL]  :!ijQa  ACI^  [tn-iui]  ver.  6 

in\»  K^i  n  MO 

selfsin;  let  him  recount  r^i^m-»   .CndUAver.r 

the  offence  which  he  liSl-^l   Kml^Xto 

did,  and   let  him  pay  r^uVjuLjj   r^v^^O 

the  sin  which  is  upon  AXtoClAO   >C\jl^1 

him,  and  let  him  add  ^^   .^^^   ^n  \  v 

r^iJ^o  *^  ^  ^  ^*i  iiif  lo 

smned.      If,  however,  \        ^-r~- 

the  man  have  not  him  vtsoa-a   rv    ,y..ii  n  ^ 

who  is  near  to  him,  so  1/>^CI3   CQA   vaATPl    ^O 
that  he  may  pay  the  sin,  r^OX-AA-jj   r^V-^*!  15 


NUMBERS   V.  3,  4- 


6 

MS.va 


the  camp,  and  let 
them  not  defile  your 
camps,  those  in  which 


I  am.  And  thus  did  the 


sons  of  Isratl ;  and  sent 


them  away  out  from 
the  camp;    according 


to  that  which  the  Lord 


commanded  Moshe,  so 


did  the  sons  of  Isratl. 


ver.  3 


•*  ^CTX^   r%tacT3  5 


lO 


NUMBERS  IV.  49— F.  2. 


MS.rb 
ver,  48 


them,  by  the  hand  of 
Moshe;  man  by  man 
for  his  works,  and  for 
those  things  which 
they  bear.  And  they 
were  numbered  ac- 
cording to  that  which 
the  Lord  commanded 
Moshe. 

And  the  Lord  spake 
with  Mosh^  and  was 
saying :  Command  the 
sons  of  Israil,  and  let 
them  send  away  out 


*  ^  'tc  He        ver.  49 

i    i  \ci3     i\   \  Q  5 


K^'i^Q  X\^qQ 


Cap.  > 


II 


NUMBERS  IV.  46,  47. 


4 
MS.ra 
ver.  46 


[Moshe  and  Aharon] 
and  the  '  Princes 
of  Israll  [numbered] 
the  Livije  in  their 
multitudes  according 
to  the  house  of  their 
fathers,  from  a  son 
of  twenty  and  five 
years  and  upwards, 
unto  a  son  of  fifty 
years ;  every  one  who 
entereth  unto  the 
works  of  the  services ; 
and  the  services 
which  were  borne 
in      the      Tabernacle 


[•^CI3f<b    f<X.Cl.^Q] 


.10 


.  «,^rv^  V       ^^      J^  ver.  47 


1  *^^    10 

f<JL..^-JCJ>1.2  15 


CONTENTS 


OF 


THE     FIVE     FRAGMENTS 


I 

PAGES 

Numbers  IV.  46,  47;    IV.  49 — V.  2;  V.  3,  4;  V.  6-8     .         .        .  4-7 

II. 

Colossians  IV.  12-18;    i  Thessalonians  I.  1-3         ....  8-1 1 

III. 

1  Thessalonians  IV.  3-15 12-15 

2  Timothy  I.  10 — II.  7       .         .         ., 16-19 

V. 

Titus  I.  II — II.  8 so-2^ 

[MS.  Syr.  c.  4  Bibl.  Bodl.] 


[11.5.]  A    2 


PRINTED     AT     THE     CLARENDON     PRESS 
BY   HORACE    HART,   PRINTER   TO  THE  UNIVERSITY 


^ 


VERSIO    PALAESTINENSIS 


SEU 


HIEROSOLYMITANA 


FIVE     PALIMPSEST    LEAVES 


BEING   FRAGMENTS    OF 


^wo  ver^  ilncient  QUanuecrip^e 


THE    SYRIAC    TEXT 

WITH 

AN    ENGLISH   TRANSLATION 

AND 

THREE   FACSIMILES 


AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS 
1893 


<^ 


cy 


La 


Anecdota  Oxoniensia 
Semitic  series 
pt. 3^5 (1889) 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


